Store at least a 2-week supply of compact, non-
perishable food. The balanced ration of basic dry
foods described in Chapter 9, Food, satisfies
requirements for adults and larger children at
minimum cost. If your family includes babies or
small children, be sure to store more milk powder,
vegetable oil, and sugar.
Continuing to breast-feed babies bornduringan
impending crisis would greatly simplify their care
should the crisis develop and worsen.
For preparing and cooking basic foods:
• Make a 3-Pipe Grain Mill like the one described
in Chapter 9, Food, or buy a small hand-cranked
grain mill, which grinds more efficiently than other
expedient devices.• Make a Bucket-Stove as described in Chapter9.
During evacuation, the stove can be used as a
container. Store some kitchen-type wooden matches
in a waterproof container.
• Keep essential containers and utensils on hand
for storing and transporting food and for cooking
and serving in a shelter.
SANITATION
A hose-vented 5-gallon can, with heavy plastic
bags for liners, for use as a toilet. Include some
smaller plastic bags and toilet paper with these
supplies. Tampons.
Insectscreenormosquitonetting,andfly
bait. See Chapter 12. .
MEDICINES
• Any special medications needed by family
members.
• Potassiumiodide,a 2-oz bottle,and a medicine-
dropper, for prophylactic protection of the thyroid
gland against radioactive iodines. (Described in the
last section of Chapter 13, Survival Without
Doctors.)
• A first-aid kit and a tube of antibiotic ointment.
LIGHT
• Long-burning candles (with small wicks) suffi-
cient for at least 14 nights.
• An expedient lamp, with extra cotton-string,
wicks, and cooking oil as described in Chapter 11.
• A flashlight and extra batteries.
RADIO
A transistor radio with extra batteries and a
metal box in which to protect it.
OTHER ESSENTIALS
Review the EVACUATION CHECKLIST (de-
veloped primarily for persons who make no prepa-
rations before a crisis) and add items that are special
requirements of your family.Chapter 17
Permanent Family Fallout Shelters for Dual Use
THE NEED
Having a permanent, ready-to-use, well
supplied fallout shelter would greatly improve
millions of American families' chances of sur-
vivinga nuclearattack.Dualusefamily shelters
- shelters that also are useful in peacetime -
are the ones that Americans are most likely to
build in normal peacetime and to maintain for
years in good conditionfor usein a nuclearwar.
The longer nuclear peace lasts, the more
difficult it will be, even during a recognized
crisis, to believe that the unthinkable war is
about to strike us and that we should build
expedient shelters and immediately take other
protective actions. The lifesaving potential of
permanent, ready-to-use family shelters will
increase with the years.
Americans who decide to build permanent
shelters need better instructions than can be
obtained from official sources or from most
contractors. This chapter brings together fall-
out shelter requirements, based on shelters and
shelter components that have been built and
tested in several states and nations. The em-
phasis is on permanent fallout shelters that
many Americans can build for themselves. The
author believes that millions of Americans can
build good permanent fallout shelters or have
local contractors build them - if they learn the
shelter requirements outlined in the following
sections of this chapter and the facts about
nuclearweaponeffectsandprotectivemeasures
given in preceding chapters. Builders can use
their skills and available local resources to
construct permanent, dependable fallout shel-
ters at affordable cost.
Requirements for a permanent, dual-use
family fallout shelter follow.
A HIGH PROTECTION FACTOR,
AT AFFORDABLE COST
A permanent fallout shelter should be built
- and can easily be built - to have a high
enough protection factor to prevent its occu-
pants from receiving fatal or incapacitating
radiation doses, and also from receiving doses
large enough to seriously worsen their risks of
developing cancer in the years following an
attack. Shelters with a protection factor of 40
(PF40) meettheminimumstandardofprotection
for public.sheltersthroughoutthe United States,
andpermanentfamilyfallout sheltersdescribed
in official pamphlets provide at least PF 40
protection. 