door air than 12cfm per person must be supplied to
acrowded, long-occupiedshelter, as willbedescribed in
the following section and in Appendix B.
MAINTAINING ENDURABLE SHELTER
CONDITIONS IN HOT WEATHER .
The Navy test mentioned above showed how
much modern Americans who are accustomed to air
conditioning could learn from jungle natives about
keepingcool and healthy byskillfullyusing hot, humid,
outdoorair. Whileworking injunglesfrom the Amazon
to Burma, I observed the methods used by the natives
to avoid unhealthful conditions like those experienced
in the Navy shelter, which was ventilated in a conven-
tional American manner. Thesejungle methods include
the first five of the six cooling methods listed in this
section. During 24 years of civil defense research, my
colleagues and I have improved upon the cooling
methods of jungle people, primarily by the invention
and thorough field-testing of the homemade KAP
described in Appendix B, and of the Directional
Fans covered by the instructions at the end of
this chapter.
Even during a heat wave in a hot part of the
United States, endurable conditions can be main-
tained in a fully occupied, belowground shelter with
this simple pump, if the test-proven requirements
listed below are ALL met.
Most basement shelters and many aboveground
shelters also can be kept at livable temperatures in
hot weather if the cooling methods listed below are
ALL followed:
• Supply enough air to carry away all the shelter
occupants' body heat without raising the "effective
temperature" of the air at the exhaust end of the
shelter by more than 2°F. The "effective tempera-
ture" of the air to which a person is exposed is
equivalent to the temperature of air at 100%relative
humidity thatcauses the same sensation of warmth or
cold. "Effective temperature" combines the effects of
the temperature of the air, its relative humidity, and
its movement. An ordinary thermometer does not
measure effective temperature. In occupancy tests of
crowded shelters when the supply of outdoor air was
hot and dry, shelter occupants have been surprised to
find that they felt hottest at the air-exhaust end of
their shelter, where the temperature reading was
lower than at the air-intake end. Their sweaty bodies
had acted as evaporative air coolers, but their body
heat had raised the effective temperature, a reliable
indicator of heat stress. If40cubicfeet per minute(40
cfm) per person of. outdoor air is supplied and
properly distributed, then (even if the outdoor air is
at a temperature which is typical of the hottest hours
during a heat wave in a hot, humid area ofthe United
States) the effective temperature ofthe shelterairwill
be increased no more than 2°F by the shelter
occupants' body heat and water vapor. Except for a
relatively fewsick peopledependent on aircondition-
ing, anyone could endure air that has an effective
temperature only 2°F higher than that of the air
outdoors.
(There are exceptions to this ventilation require-
ment when the ceiling or walls of basement or
aboveground shelters in buildings are heated by the
sun to levels higher than skin temperature. In such
shelters, more than 40 cfm of outdoor air per
occupant must be supplied. However, if a shelter is
covered by at least two feet of earth, it will be so well
insulated that its ceiling and walls will not get hot
enough to heat the occupants.)
• Move the air gently, so as not to raise its
temperature. In the aforementioned Navy test, a high
speed, electric ventilating pump and the frictional
resistance of pipes and filters raised the temperature
of the air supplied to the shelter by 3°F. Under
extreme heat wave conditions, an air supply 3°F
hotter than outdoor air could be disastrous-espe-
cially ifconsiderably less than 40 cfm per occupant is
supplied, and body heat raises the air temperature
several additional degrees.• Distribute the air quite evenly throughout the
shelter. Ina trench shelter, where airispumped inat one
end and flows out the other, good distribution is
assured. Inlarger shelters, such as basements,ventilating
air willmove from the air-supplyopeningstraight to the
air-exhaust opening. Persons out of this air stream will
not be adequately cooled. 