
Appendix A show such braces. The lowest rectangu-
lar brace should be positioned 31/2 feet above the
flooring at the bottom of the vertical entry (see Fig.
0.20).
• Equipped with blast doors each made of5sheets
of 3 4-inch exterior plywood (see Fig. 0.15) bonded
with resin glue and nailed together with 41/2 in. nails.
The nails should be driven on 4-in. spacingsand their
protruding ends should be clinched (bent over). The
blast doors must be secured against being yanked
open by negative pressure ("suction") by securing
them with a strong wire bridle (see Fig.· D.14), and
with the lower, fixed wirestrongly connected nearthe
bottom of the entry to all ofthe vertical poles on one
side, as shown in Fig. D.14.
• Provided with an adequate ventilation pump
and with ventilation openings protected against blast
by expedient blast-valves (Fig. 0.18) installed in the
vertical entries as shown in Fig. D.19, to protect the
air-intake and the air-exhaust openings. (Ventilation
openings should be as far as practical from buildings
and combustible materials. Manually closed ventila-
tion openings are NOT effective at the 50-psi
overpressure range of mostweapons, because there is
insufficient time to close them between the arrival ofthe warning light from the explosion and the arrival
of the blast wave.)
• Made with the roof poles covered by a yielding
layer of brush or limbs about 6 inches thick, or of
innerspring mattresses. This yielding layer in turn
should be covered with bedsheets or other strong
cloth, to increase the effectiveness of protectiveearth
arching. Brush or limbs should be laid in 3layers with
sticks of the middle layer perpendicular to those of
the other two layers.
• Covered with 5 feet of earth, sloped no steeper
than 100.
• Provided with additional shielding materials in
the entryways, as shown in Fig. 0.20. Such shielding
would be needed to prevent occupantsfrom receiving
possibly incapacitating or fatal doses of initial
nuclear radiation through the entrywaysat the 50-psi
overpressure range, if the shelter is subjected to the
effects of a weapon that isone megaton, or larger, in
explosive yield.
Damp earth serves better for neutron shielding
material than dry earth and can be substituted for
water as shielding material if sufficient water
containers are not available. (At the 50-psi over-
pressure range from explosions smaller than one
megaton, the entry and shielding shown in Fig. 0.20
may not provide adequate protection against initial
nuclear radiation.) .
When the shelter is readied for rapid occupancy,
the shelter-ventilating KAP is secured against the
ceiling. and the bags of earth in the doorway (under
the KAP) are removed. Persons entering the shelter
would stoop to go under the platform adjacent to the
vertical entry. This platform is attached to vertical
wall-poles of the horizontal entry and supports
shielding waterand earth. When all except the person
who will shut and secure the blast door are inside the
shelter room, occupants should quickly begin to
place bags of earth in the doorway. When the attack
has begun, the whole doorway can be closed with
bags of earth or other dense objects until ventilation
is necessary.
The entries of other types of blastshelterscan be
shielded in similar ways.
• Protected against fire by being built sufficiently
distant from buildingsand flammable vegetation and
by having its exposed wood covered. For maximum
expedient protection against ignition by the thermal
radiation from a large explosion, all exposed wood
should be free ofbark, coated with wet mud or damp
slaked lime (whitewash), and covered with aluminum
sheet metal or foil to reflect heat. (Most of the
thermal radiation from an explosion that was
I megaton or larger would reach the 50-psi over-
pressure range after the blast wave had arrived and
had torn the expedient protective coverings from the
wood. However, as has been observed in megaton
nuclearweapon tests, the dustcloud first produced by
the popcorning effect and later by the blast winds
would screen solid wood near the ground so
effectively against thermal radiation that itwould not
be ignited, provided it had been initially protected as
described above.