ing earth mounded over some of the above-
ground shelters was, in fact, removed by the blast
winds of these relatively small test explosions, evenat
the lower overpressure ranges at which homes would
be wrecked. In contrast, in blast tests where the
steeply mounded earth was damp, little blast-wind
erosion resulted. (The reader should remember that
even if shelters without blast doors are undamaged,
the occupants are likely to suffer injuries.)
CONSTRUCTION PRINCIPLES
Millions of Americans-if given good instruc-
tions, strong motivation, and several days to
work-should be able to build blast shelters with
materials found in many rural areas and suburban
neighborhoods. During a crisis, yard trees could be
cut down for poles and sticks, and a garage or part of
a house could be torn down for lumber. Many
average citizens could build expedient blast shelters if
they learn to:
• Utilize earth arching by making a yielding
shelter. The remarkable protection that eartharching
gives to those parts of a shelter designed to use it is
illustrated by Fig. D.3.
This picture shows the unbroken roof of a 4-
foot-wide Pole-Covered Trench Shelter that was
Fig. D.3. Effective earth arching in the earth
covering of this 4-ft-wide Pole-Covered Trench
Shelter prevented a single pole from being broken by
blast forces that exerted a downward force of 53 psi
(over 31/2 tons per square foot) on the overlying
earth.
built in rock-like soil and blast tested where the blast
pressure outside was 53 psi. Its strong blast doors
prevented the blast wave from entering. Without the
protection of earth arching that developed in the 5
feet of earth cover over the yielding roof poles, the
poles would have been broken like straws. In
contrast, the ground shock and earth pressure
produced by l-kiloton blast effects almost com-
pletely collapsed the unsupported, rock-like earth
walls.
Fig. D.4. Post-blast interior of an Above-
ground, Door-Covered Shelter that survived l-kilo-
ton blasteffects at the 5.8-psi overpressurerange. The
shelter walls were made of bedsheets containing
earth, as described in Appendix A.
Figure D.4 also indicates the effectiveness
of earth arching. This photo shows the roof of a
small, earth-covered fallout shelter, as it appeared
after surviving blast effects severe enough to
demolish most homes. The roof was made of light,
hollow-core, interior doors and looks as though it
had been completely broken. In fact, only the lower
sheets of l/s-inch-thick veneer of the hollow-core
interior doors were broken. (These breaks were
caused by a faulty construction procedure-a front-
end loader had dumped several tons ofearth onto the
uncovered doors.) The upper l/s-inch-thick sheets of
veneer were bowed downward, unbroken, until an
earth arch formed in the 2-foot-thick earth covering
and prevented the thin sheets from being broken.
Earth arching also prevented this roof from being
smashed in by blast overpressure that exerted a
pressure of 5.8 psi (835 pounds per square foot) on
the surface of the earth mounded over this open
shelter. (See Appendix A for detailsofconstruction.)
• Make shelters with the minimum practical
ceiling height and width. Most 'of the narrowcovered-trench shelters used by tens of thousands of
Londoners during the World War II blitz were built
with only 41/z-foot ceilings, to maximize blast
protection and minimize high water-table problems.
These shelters were found to be among the safest for
protection against nearby explosions. The Chinese
also have a good understanding of this 'design
principleand skillfully utilize the protection provided
by earth arching. A Chinesecivil defense handbook
states: "... the height and width of tunnel shelters
should be kept to the minimum required to
accommodate the sheltering requirements," and
"The thicker the protective layer of earth, the greater
the ability to. resist blast waves.t"
• Shore earth walls to prevent their caving in as a
result of ground shock and earth pressure. Most
unshored (that is, unsupported) earth walls are
partially collapsed by ground shock at much lower
blast overpressuresthanthoseat which a flexible roof
protected by earth arching isdamaged. Figure 0.