 of temporary
blindness that lasted as long as 2 or 3 hours, but only
one case of permanent retinal injury was reported."
Flash blindness may be produced by scattered
light; the victim of this temporary affliction usually
has not looked directlyat the fireball. Flash blindness
would be more severe at night, when the pupils are
larger. Retinal burns, a permanent injury, can result
at great distances if the eye is focused on the fireball.
People inside any shelter with no openings
through which light can shine directly would be
protected from flash burns and eye damage. Persons
in the open with adequate warning of a nuclear
explosion can protect themselves from both flash
blindness and retinal burns by closing or shielding
their eyes. They should get behind anything casting a
shadow- quickly.
SKIN BURNS FROM HEATED DUST
(THE POPCORNING EFFECT)
When exposed grains of sand and particles of
earth are heated very rapidly by intense thermal
radiation, they explode like popcorn and pop up into
the air." While this dust is airborne, the continuing
thermal radiation heats it to temperatures that may
be as high as several thousand degrees Fahrenheit on
a clear day in areas of severe blast. Then the shock
wave and blast winds arrive and can carry the
burning-hot air and dust into an open shelter.6.9
Animals inside open shelters have been singed and
seriously burned in some of the nuclearair-burst tests
in Nevada."
Thus Japanese working inside an open tunnel-
shelter at Nagasaki within about 100yards ofground
zero were burned on the portion oftheir skin that was
exposed to the entering blast wind, even though they
were protected by one or two turns in the tunnel.4
(None of these Japanese workers who survived the
blast-wave effects had fatal burns or suffered serious
radiation injuries, which they certainly would have
suffered had they been outside and subjected to the
thermal pulse and the intense initial nuclear radiation
from the fireball.)
Experiments conducted during several nuclear
test explosions have established the amount of
thermal radiation that must be delivered to exposed
earth to produce the popcorning effect." Large air
bursts may result inexposed skin beingburned by hotdust and heated air produced at overpressure ranges
as low as 3 or 4 psi. However, calculations indicate
that the large surface bursts most likely to endanger
Americans would not result in the occupants ofsmall,
open shelters being burned by these effects-i-except
at somewhat higher overpressures.
Protection is simple against the heated dust and
very hot airthat may be blown into an openshelterby
the blast. When expecting an attack, occupants of an
open shelter should keep towels or other cloths in
hand. When they see the bright light from an explo-
sion, they should cover their heads and exposed skin.
If time and materials are available, much better
protection is given by making expedient blast doors,
as described in Appendix D. When occupants seethe
very bright light from a large explosion miles away,
they can close and secure such doors before the
arrival of the blast wave several seconds later.
ESSENTIAL LIFE-SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
Shelters can be built to give excellent protection
against all nuclear weapon effects, except in places
within or very close to cratered areas. But most
shelters would be of little use inareas of heavy fallout
unless supplied with enough life-support equipment
to enable occupants to stay inthe shelters until condi-
tions outside become endurable. In heavy fallout
areas most high-protection-factor shelters would be
crowded; except in cold weather, most would need a
ventilating pump to remove warmed air and bring in
enough cooler outdoor air to maintain survivable
temperature-humidity conditions. Means for storing
adequate water is another essential life-support
requirement. These and other essential or highly
desirable life-support needs are covered in following
chapters.
BASEMENT SHELTERS
The blast and fire effects of a massive, all-out
attack of the magnitude possible in 1987 would
destroy or damage most American homes and
other buildings and endanger the occupants of
shelters inside them. Outside the blast and/or
fire areas, the use of shelters inside buildings
would not be nearly as hazardous. However, an
enemy might also target some areas into which
large numbers of urbanAmericans hadevacua-
ted before the attack, although such targetting
is notbelievedto be included inSovietstrategy.
Earth-covered expedient shelters in a blast area
give better protection against injury from blast, fire,
or fallout than do almost all basements. 