 windows). A square piece 5 inches
wider on a side than the diameter of the bucket to be used.
3. Cloth duct tape. one inch wide and 8 feet long (or 4 ft., if2 inches wide). Or 16ft. offreezer tape
one inch wide.
ztr:
-1
;;0
C
nj
oz
,Vl
;;,0
~
0'-
N
-00Ieo
0>
0..Small nail - sharpened
Stick, or a wooden tool handle
(best 2-2\;1 inch diameter and at least 12inches long)
Hammer
Pliers
Scissors
Needle - quite a large sewing needle, but less than 2\;1 inches long
Knife with a small blade - sharp
Ruler (12 inches)
Desirable but not essential tools: a file and
a fine-toothed hacksaw blade.
4. Twoplastic bags 14to 16inches in circumference, such as ordinary plastic
bread bags. The original length of these bags should be at least 5 inches
greater than the height ofthe bucket.
S. About one square foot of wall board (sheetrock), to make anhydrite drying
agent.
6. Two I-quart Mason jars or other airtight containers, one in which to store
anhydrite and another inwhich to keep dry the KFM charging devices.
7. Strong rubber bands .. enough to make a loop around the bucket. Or
string.
d. Heat allofthese filled "bowls" ofgypsum in hottestoven for one hour.
Ifsufficientaluminumfoiland time are available, it is best to heat the gypsum
and store the anhydrite as follows:
N
-\0
zVl...,
:;cI
e
Q
<5zSIl
1
~
-..j
VIII. Make the Drying Agent
--The Easiest Part to Make, but Time Consuming .-
For a KFM to measure radiation accurately, the air inside its ionization
chamber must be kept very dry. An excellent drying agent (anhydrite) can be
made by heating the gypsum in ordinary gypsum wallboard (sheetrock). Do
NOTuse calcium chloride.
Take a piece of gypsum wallboard approximately 12 inches by 6 inches, and
preferablywith its gypsum about 3/8 inches thick. Cut offthe paper and glue,
easiest done by first wetting the paper. [Since water vapo~ from normal air
penetrates the plastic cover ofa KFM and can dampen the anhydrite and make
it ineffective in as shorta time as two days, fresh batches of anhydrite must be
made before the attack and kept ready inside the shelter for replacement. The
useful life of the drying agent inside a KFM can be greatly lengthened by
keeping the KFM inside an .airtight container (such as a peanut butterjar with
a 4-inch-diameter mouth) with some drying agent, when the KFM is not being
used.]
Break the white gypsum filling into small pieces and make the
largest no more than 112 in. across. (The tops of pieces larger
than this may be too close to the aluminum foil leaves.) If the
gypsum is dry, using a pair of pliers makes breaking it easier.
Make the largestside ofthe largest pieces nobiggerthan this.
Dry gypsum is not a drying agent. To drive the water out of the gy~sum
molecules and produce the drying agent (anhydrite), heat the gypsum In an
oven at its highest temperature (which should be above 400 degrees F) fo~ one
hour. Heat the gypsum after placing the small pieces no more than two pieces
deep in a pan. Or heat the pieces over a fire for 20 minutes or more in a pan or
can heated to a dull red.
a. So that the right amount of anhydrite can be taken quickly out of its
storagejar, put enough pieces of gypsum in a can with the same diameter
as the KFM, measuring out a batch of gypsum that almost covers the
bottom ofthe can with a single layer.
b. Cut a piece of aluminum foil about 8 in. x 8 in. square, and fold up its
edges to form a bowl-like container in which to heat one batch of gypsum
pieces.
Measure out 10or 12such batches, and puteach batch in its aluminum foil
"bowl."
c.
1.
2.
3.
4.
S.
VI. 