51/2-ft-
wide KAP, with a 1!4-in.-diameter pull-cord attached
18 in. below its hinge line, and with two "Y" bridles
for its two operators, pumped air at the rate of over
11,000 cubic ft per minute through a large basement
shelter during tests.
To make a durable connection of the pull-cord
to the center vertical brace: (I) Attach a wire loop
(Fig. 22) about 161/
2 in. below the hinge line. This
loop can be made of coat hanger wire and should go
around the center vertical brace. This fixed loop
should be kept from slipping on the center brace by
bending four 6-penny nails over it in front as
illustrated, and two smaller nails in back. (2) Make a
free-turning, triple-wire loop connected to the fixed
loop. (3)Coverpartofthe free-turning loop with tape
and tie the pull-cord to this loop. Tie the pull-cord
tightly over the taped part.
ORNL DWG 72-8204
MAKE A 2-;n DIAMETER
SNUG LOOP OF 3 TURNS
OF COATHANGER WIRE.
PRESSURE
SENSITIVE
CLOTH TAPE
FUSED
NYLON
j:)
U«
0°-90
Fig. 22.IX. SOLUTIONS TO SPECIAL PROBLEMS
A. Increasing the Usefulness of Shelters
by Supplying 40 cfm per Planned Occupant
If a shelter is fully occupied for days during hot
weather and iscooled bothday and night bypumping
through it and distributing at least 40 cubic feet per
minute of outdoorair for each occupant-more than
is required to maintain tolerable temperatures at
night-these advantages result: .
• The shelter occupants will be exposed to
effective temperatures less than 2°F higher than the
current effective temperatures outdoors, and at night
will get relief from extreme heat.
• The floors, walls, etc. of a shelter so ventilated
will be cooled at night to temperatures well below
daytime temperatures. Therefore, during the day a
considerable fraction ofthe occupants'body heatwill
flow into the floors, walls, and other parts of the
shelter and less body heat will have to be carried out
by the exhaust airduringthe hottest hours oftheday.
Thus daytime temperatures will be reduced.
• Since the shelter occupants will be cooler and
will sweat less, especially at night, they will need less
water than they would require if the shelter were
ventilated at a rate of less than 40 cfm per occupant.
(If the outdoor air is very hot and desert-dry, it
usually is better to supply less than 40 cfm per
occupant during the hottest hours of the day.)
• Ifthe shelter were to be endangered by the entry
of outside smoke, carbon monoxide or other
poisonous gases, or heavy descending fallout under
windy conditions, ventilation of the shelter could be
temporarily restricted or stopped for a longer period
than would be practical if the shelter itself were
warmer at the beginning of such a crisis period.
I. Gradually start the pump swinging back and
forth, moving your arms and body as illustrated and
pulling mostly with your legs and body.
2. Stand at such a distance from the pump that
you can pull the pump toward you until the forward-
swinging pumpjusttouchesthe tightlystretched pull-
.cord-and at such a distance that you can keep the
pull-cord slack during the whole of the pump's free
backswing.
3. To be sure you do not reduce the amount of
air pumped, rapidly move yourarms forward assoon
as the forward-swinging pump touches the tightened
pull-cord. Hold your arms forward until the pump
again starts to swing toward you.
PULL-CORD
TO PUMP,
\
\
\
\ ,
\ /
" /" /'-- . /'
---
B. Operation of Larger KAPs
A larger KAP can be pulled most easily by
providing it with a"Y"bridle(seeFig. 23)attached to
the end of its pull-cord.
Fig. 24.
KEEP PULL-CORD SLACK DURING ALL
OF FREE BACKSWI~
Fig. 23. Y-bridle for pull-cord on KAP.
TO SECURE KNOT, SLIGHTLY MELT NYLON WITH MATCH.
V-BRIDLE FOR ~ ~ KEARNY AIR ~.
