 willbe
higher than in a small shelter.Chapter 13
Surviving Without Doctors
A TEMPORARY RETURN TO SELF-HELP
Most doctors, hospital facilities, and medical
supplies are located in cities. An all-out attack would
destroy most of these modern blessings. Even if
medical assistance were nearby, only a few of the
survivors confined to shelters inareas of heavy fallout
would be able to get needed medicines or the help ofa
doctor. For periods ranging from days to months,
most unprepared survivors would be forced to live
under medical conditionsalmostas primitiveas those
experienced by the majority of mankind for all but
the past few decades of human history.
BENIGN NEGLECT
Life without modern medical help would be less
painful and hazardous for those survivors who have
some practical knowledge of what should be
done-or not done-under primitive, unsanitary
conditions. Information about first aid and hygienic
precautions can be obtained from widely available
Red Cross and civil defense booklets and courses,
This knowledge, with a stock of basic first aid
supplies, would reduce suffering and prevent ~any
dangerous illnesses. However, first aid instructions
do not include advice about what to do for serious
injuries and sicknesses if no doctors or effective
medicines are available.
Where There Is No Doctor," the excellent self-
help handbook recommended by Volunteers in
Technical Assistance, gives much information that
goes far beyond the scope of first aid. But even this
handbook repeatedly recommends getting profes-
sional medical help whenever possible for serious
injuries and illnesses.
Fortunately, the human body has remarkable
capabilities for healing itself, especially if the injured
or sick personand hiscompanions practice intelligent
"benign neglect." Such purposeful non-interference
with the body's recuperative processes was called
"masterful inactivity" by Colonel C. Blanchard
Henry, M.D., a widely recognized authority on mass
casualty evacuation and treatment. Colonel Henry
was one of the first medical officers to visit Hiroshima
and Nagasaki after their destruction and was an
experienced analyzer of civil defense preparations in
several countries.
The following is a brief summary of
Colonel Henry's medical advice for nuclear war
survivors living under primitive conditions and
unable to get- the help of a doctor or effective
medicines.33 (Additionaladvice, enclosed inbrackets,
is from a medical publication.")
• Wounds: Apply only pressure dressings to stop
bleeding-unless an artery has been cut, as bya blast-
hurled piece of glass. If blood is spurting from a
wound, apply both a pressure dressing a~d a
windlass-type. tourniquet. Loosen the tourrnquet
pressure about every 15 minutes, to allow enough
blood to reach the flesh beyond the tourniquet and
keep it alive. There isa fair chance that clotting und~r
the pressure dressing will stop blood loss before It
becomes fatal.
• Infected wounds: Do not change dressings
frequently. The formation of white pus shows that
white corpuscles are mobilizing to combat the
infection. In World War I, wounded soldiers in
hospitals suffered agonies having their wounds
cleaned and dressed frequently; many died as a result
of such harmful care. In contrast, before antibiotics
became available late in World War II, casts and
dressings on infected wounds sometimes were not
changed for weeks. (The author saw this treatment in
China and India and smelled the stench resultingfrom such "benign neglect" of American soldiers'
wounds neglect that helped save limbs and lives.)
• Pieces ofglass deeply embedded in flesh: Do not
probe with tweezers or a knife inan attempt to extract
them. Most glass will come out when the wounds
discharge pus.
• Burns: Do not apply grease, oil or any other
medicine to the burned area. Cover the area securely
with a clean. dry dressing or folded cloth. Do not
change the dressing frequently. [For most burns, the
bandage need not be removed until the tenth to
fourteenth day. Give plenty of slightly salted water:
about I teaspoon (~.5 grn) of salt per quart (or liter),
preferably chilled. in amounts of I to 3 liters
daily. "]
• Broken bones: Apply simple splints to keep the
bones from moving. Do not worry about deformities;
most can be corrected later by a doctor. Do not
attempt traction setting of broken bones.
• Shock: Keep the victim warm. Place blankets or
other insulation material under him. 