Nuclear War
Survival
Skills
Updated and Expanded
1987 Edition
Cresson H. Kearny
With Foreword by Dr. Edward Teller
Original Edition Published September, 1979,
by Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
a Facility of the
u.s. Department of Energy
Published by the
Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine
Cave Junction, OregonCopyright © 1986 by Cresson H. Kearny
Cresson H. Kearny's additions to the Oak Ridge National Laboratory original 1979
edition are the only parts covered by this copyright, and are printed in this type print to
distinguish these additions from the original upcopyrighted parts. The uncopyrighted
parts are printed in a different type of print (like this).
No part of the added, copyrighted parts (except briefpassages that a reviewer may
quote in a review) may be reproduced in any form unless the reproduced material
includes the following two sentences: "Copyright © 1986 by Cresson H. Kearny. The
copyrighted material may be reproduced without obtaining permission from anyone,
provided: (1) all copyrighted material is reproduced full-scale (except for microfiche
reproductions), and (2) the part of this copyright notice within quotation marks is
printed along with the copyrighted material."
First printing May 1987
Second printing November 1988
Third printing September 1990
ISBN 0-942487-01-X
Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number 87-60790CRESSON H. KEARNY
Civil Defense Consultant, Retired
A LETTER TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE FROM CRESSON KEARNY, INVENTOR OF THE KFM 
Dear Reader, 
At the time I developed the Kearny Fallout Meter with help from U.S. Department of Energy 
scientists and engineers, we did not address the issue of nuclear terrorism. We were so 
concerned back then in the 1970's with the danger of all-out nuclear war that we neglected to 
instruct users of the KFM of its advantages in a terrorist attack with few and smaller nuclear 
weapons. Fear of life-threatening fallout from massive Soviet attacks carried over to exaggerated 
fears of all radiation, including that from terrorists' few weapons. 
In Oak Ridge National Laboratory publications to be read by the public we did not even mention 
hormesis, for to have done so at that time probably would have prevented my most influential book, 
"Nuclear War Survival Skills," from being purchased and used by government agencies to instruct 
civil defense professionals. 
When Hitler first bombed London the panic the bombs caused did far more damage than the bombs 
themselves. After the citizens of London lost their exaggerated fears of the bombings, life went on 
much as normal. And so it would be with a nuclear terrorist attack on the U.S. One nuclear bomb 
exploded in a U.S. city would likely be very small. And though it could do catastrophic damage in a 
small area, its relative impact on the physical infrastructure of the whole United States would be 
extremely small. However, because of the irrational, universal fear people have of any radioactivity, 
the panic that would ensue from such an attack would do far more damage than the attack itself. 
After the disintegration of the Soviet Union we should have stressed in the KFM instructions that 
small doses of radioactivity are hormetic, healthful because they stimulate the immune system. This 
was proven in laboratories as far back as the 1920's. With the advent of the A-bomb almost all the 
hormetic research stopped. And only in the last decade has it resumed on a serious scale. 
In the KFM instructions it was assumed that no medical help would be available during and after a 
nuclear war. The doses that an individual can take under those circumstances without being injured 
are lower than what that individual can withstand if he has medical assistance such as antibiotics, 
etc. In a nuclear terrorist attack medical aid would still be available to the majority of American 
citizens; therefore they could withstand somewhat larger radiation doses. This would enable them 
to carry on with the daily necessities of life in most areas. If we allow irrational fear and panic 
to shut down trucking, communications, and vital services, the disaster will be far greater than 
it needs to be. 
Assembling a KFM and learning to use it before you need it will help you lose irrational fear of 
radioactivity. You will not be paralyzed by panic in an emergency. You will know how to conduct 
yourself in a manner that may not only save your life but also the lives of many of those around 
you as well. 
I urge you to study the KFM instructions now and make an instrument. You should realize that 
under terrorist attack conditions the radiation doses you can receive without being incapacitated 
are higher than under nuclear wartime conditions. So you can go to work, drive your truck or car, 
or assist others. 
Sincerely, 
Cresson H. Kearny [Signiture in his handwritting]
Cresson H. Kearny [February 1999]Contents
FOREWORD by DR. EDWARD TELLER. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . . . .. .. . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . .. . I
ABOUT THE AUTHOR by DR. EUGENE P. WIGNER. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 3
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS............ 4
INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
CHAPTER I-The Dangers from Nuclear Weapons: Myths and Facts II
CHAPTER 2-Psychological Preparations , 20
CHAPTER 3-Warnings and Communications 22
CHAPTER 4-Evacuation 27
CHAPTER .5-~helter, the Greatest Need 36
CHAPTER 6-Ventilation and Cooling of Shelters 50
CHAPTER 7-Protection Against Fires and Carbon Monoxide : 61
CHAPTER 8-Water. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 66
CHAPTER 9-Food 75
CHAPTER lO-Fallout Radiation Meters " , , , 94
CHAPTER II-Light lOa
CHAPTER 12-Shelter Sanitation and Preventive Medicine " ., 103
CHAPTER 13-Surviving Without Doctors 108
CHAPTER 14-Expedient Shelter Furnishings. " , 117
CHAPTER IS-Improvised Clothing and Protective Items. " , , 125
CHAPTER 16-Minimum Pre-Crisis Preparations , " 132
CHAPTER 17-Permanent Family Fallout Shelters for Dual Use 134
CHAPTER 18-Trans-Pacific Fallout 151
APPENDICES
A-Instructions for Six Expedient Fallout Shelters 155
A.I-Door-Covered Trench Shelter " 160
A.2-Pole-Covered Trench Shelter 164
A.3-Small-Pole Shelter 169
A.4-Aboveground, Door-Covered Shelter 176
A.5-Aboveground, Ridgepole Shelter 181
A.6-Aboveground, Crib-Walled Shelters , 187
B-How to Make and Use a Homemade Shelter-Ventilating Pump, the KAP 193
C-Instructions for a Homemade Fallout Meter. 213
D-Expedient Blast Shelters 243
E-How to Make and Use a Homemade Plywood
Double-Action Piston Pump and Filter 261
F-Means for Providing Improved Ventilation and Daylight
to a Shelter with an Emergency Exit 273
SELECTED REFERENCES 277
SELECTED INDEX - 279Updated and Expanded 1987 Edition
The purpose of this book is to provide
Americans and other unprepared people with
information and self-help instructions that will
significantly increase their chances of sur-
viving a nuclear attack. It brings togetherfield-
tested instructions that, if followed by a large
fraction of Americans during a crisis that pre-
cedes an attack, could save millions of lives.
The author is convinced that the vulnerability
especially of Americans to nuclear threat or
attack must be reduced and that the wide dis-
semination of the information contained in this
book will help preserve peace with freedom.
Underlying the advocacy of Americans learning
these down-to-earth survival skills is the belief that if
one prepares for the worst. the worst is less likely to
happen. Effective American civil defense preparations
would reduce the probability of nuclear blackmail and
war. Yet in our world of increasing dangers, it is
significant that the United States spends much less per
capita on civil defense than many other countries. The
United States' annual funding is about 50 cents per
capita, and only a few cents of this is spent on
war-related civil defense. Unless U.S. civil de-
fense policies are improved, you are unlikely to
receive from official sources much of the sur-
vival information given in this book.
Over400,000copiesofthe Oak Ridge Nation-
al Laboratory original 1979 edition of Nuclear
War Survival Skills have been sold by various
private publishers. A few additions and modifi-
cations, some helpful and others harmful, were
made in several of these private printings. This
updated and expanded edition is needed because
of changes in nuclear weapons and strategies
between 1979 and 1987, and because of improve-
ments in self-help survival equipment and in-
structions.
The 1987 edition provides current informa-
tion on how the Soviet Union's continuing de-
ployment of smaller, more accurate, more
numerous warheads should affect your shelter-
building and evacuation plans.
In the first chapter the myths and facts about the
consequences of a massive nuclearattack are discussed.
Two post-1979 myths have been added: the myth
of blinding post-attack increased ultra-violet
sunlight. and the myth of unsurvivable "nuclear
winter" - along with refuting facts.
A new chapter, "Permanent Family Fallout
Shelters for Dual Use", has been added, because
the author has received many requests for
instructions for buildingpermanentsmall shel-
ters better and less expensive than those de-
scribed in official civil defense hand-outs.
Another new chapter, "Trans-Pacific Fallout",
tells how to reduce radiation dangers that you
will face if one or more nations use nuclear
weapons, but none are exploded on America.
Improvedinstructions aregivenfor making
and using a KFM, based on the findings of
numerous builders since 1979. (The KFM still is
the only accurate and dependable fallout radia-
tion meter that millions of average people can
make for themselves in a few hours, using only
common household materials - if they have
these improved instructions with patterns.)
Field-tested instructions for easily made Direc-
tional Fans, the simplest means for pumping
air, have been added to the "Ventilation and
Cooling of Shelters" chapter. Also included in
this book are scores of other new facts and
updatings likely to help save lives if nuclear
war strikes.
A new appendix gives instructions for a
homemakeable Plywood Double-Action Piston
Pump, inspired by a wooden air pump the
author saw being used in China in 1982.
This first-of-its-kind book is primarily a
compilation and summary of civil defense
measures developed at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory and elsewhere over the past 24
years, and field tested by typical untrained
Americans in many states, from Florida to
Washington. The reader is urged to make at least
some of these low-cost preparations before a crisis
arises. The main emphasis, however, is on survival
preparations that could be made in the last few days of
a worsening CrISIS.
The author wrote the original, uncopy-
righted Nuclear War Survival Skills while working
as a research engineer at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. As a result, he has no proprietory
rights and has gotten nothing but satisfaction
from past sales. Nor will he gain materially
from future sales, as can be judged by reading
his copyrightnotice coveringthis edition. Civil
defense professionals andothersconcerned with
providing better self-help survival information
can reproduce parts or all of this 1987 edition
without getting permission from anyone, pro-
vided they comply with the terms of the copy-
right notice.Foreword
There are two diametrically opposite views on
civil defense. Russian official policy holds that civil
defense isfeasible even in anuclear war. American
official policy, or at any rate the implementation of
that policy, is based on the assumption that civil
defense is useless.
The Russians, having learned a bitter lesson in
the second world war, have bent every effort to
defend their people under all circumstances. They
are spending several billion dollars per year on this
activity. They have effective plans to evacuate their
cities before they let loose a nuclear strike. They
have strong shelters for the people who must
remain in the cities:They are building up protected
food reserves to tide them over a critical period.
All this may mean that in a nuclear exchange,
which we must try to avoid or to deter, the Russian
deaths would probably not exceed ten million.
Tragic assuch a figure is, the Russian nation would
survive. If they succeed in eliminating the United
States they can commandeer food, machinery and
manpower from the rest of the world. They could
recover rapidly. They would have attained their
goal: world domination.
In the American view the Russian plan is
unfeasible. Those who argue on this side point out
the great power of nuclear weapons. In this they
are right. Their argument is particularly impressive
in its psychological effect.
But this argument has never been backed up
by a careful quantitative analysis which takes into
account the planned dispersal and sheltering of
the Russian population and the other measures
which the Russians have taken and those to which
they are committed.
That evacuation of our own citizens can be
extremely useful if we see that the Russians are
evacuating is simple common sense. With the use
of American automobiles an evacuation could be
faster and more effective than is possible in Russia.
To carry it out we need not resort to the totalitarian
methods of the iron curtain countries. It will suffice
to warn our people and advise them where to go,
how to protect themselves. The Federal Emergency
Management Administration contains the begin-
nings on which such a policy might be built.
The present book does not,and indeed cannot,
make the assumption that such minimal yet
extremely useful government guidance will be
available. Instead it outlines the skills that in-
dividuals or groups of individuals can learn and
apply in order to improve their chances of survival.
This book is not adescription of civil defense.
It is a guide to "Stop-gap" civil defense which
individuals could carry out for themselves, if need
be, with no expenditures by our government. It
fills the gap between the ineffective civil defense
that we havetoday and the highly effective survival
preparations that we could and should have a few
years from now. However, if we go no further than
what we can do on the basisof this book, then the
United States cannot survive a major nuclear war.
Yet this book, besides being realisticand objec-
tively correct, serves two extremely important pur-
poses. One is: it will help to save lives. The second
purpose is to show that with relatively inexpensive
governmental guidance and supplies, an educated
American public could, indeed, defend itself. We
could survive a nuclear war and remain a nation.
This is an all-important goal. Its most practical
aspect lies in the fact that the men in the Kremlin
are cautious. If they cannot count on destroying us
they probably will never launch their nuclear
arsenal against us. Civil defense isat once the most
peaceful and the most effective deterrent of
nuclear war.
Some may argue that the Russians could
evacuate again and again and thus, by forcing us
into similar moves, exhaust us. I believe that in
reality they would anger us sufficiently so that we
would rearm in earnest. That is not what the
Russians want to accomplish.
Others may say that the Russians could strike
without previous evacuation. This couid result in
heavy losses on their part which, I hope, they will
not risk.
Civil defense as here described will not
eliminate the danger of nuclear war. It will con-
siderably diminish its probability.
This book takes a long overdue step in
educating the American people. It does not suggest
that survival is easy. It does not prove that national
survival is possible. But it can save lives and it will
stimulate thought and action which will be crucial
in our two main purposes: to preserve freedom
and to avoid war.
Edward TellerNuclear War Survival Skills Video Tapes
The Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine, which distributes extensive written, audio, and video information on ex-
pedient and permanent civil defense procedures and preparations, has produced a series offourvideotapes inwhich the field
tested instructions in Nuclear WarSurvival Skills and facts about nuclear weapons effects are demonstrated by civil defense
volunteers including demonstrations and explanations by Cresson H. Kearny.
Shelter construction and ventilation, water purification, food preparation, radiation monitoring and many other life-saving
procedures - these essential survival skills are performed just as they would be to save lives in a real nuclear emergency.
This is six hours of video viewing that should be experienced by every American family.
Part 1: Expedient Blast and Radiation Shelters (102 minutes)
Part 2: Shelter Ventilation and Various Other Survival Skills (78 minutes)
Part 3: Home-makeable and Commercial Fallout Radiation Meters (117 minutes)
Part 4: Nuclear War Facts as Told to Teenagers (74 minutes)
Complete Set - Four parts - Four tapes: $95.00 VHS $105.00 Beta
Each Tape Alone: $29.50 VHS. $32.00 Beta
Nuclear War Survival Skills Quantity Book Discounts
This book should be in every American home and place of business. It should be a part of all civilian and military defense
preparations. In this nuclear age, prior preparation and knowledge are the primary elements of survival during nuclear war.
This book provides that essential knowledge.
It is published on a non-profit, non-royalty basis by the Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine (a 501 [c] [3] public
foundation). These lowpricesalso are made possible by continuing donationsto the Oregon Institute ofScienceandMedicine
given specifically to help meet the cost of publication and wide distribution of this updated and enlarged edition.
Nuclear WarSurvival Skills is available postage paid within the United States at the following prices:
1 copy $12.50
5 copies $45.00
10 copies $80.00
100 copies $700.00
larger quantities - quoted on request
Please send me:
Nuclear WarSurvival Skills Books: copies
Nuclear WarSurvival Skills Video Tapes:
Part 1: $29.50 VHS $32.00 Beta Part 3: $29.50 VHS
Part 2: $29.50 VHS $32.00 Beta Part 4: $29.50 VHS
Set of All Four Tapes: _ $95.00 VHS _ $105.00 Beta
I enclose payment of $ _
Please send me more information about civil defense.
I also am enclosing a tax-deductible contribution in the amount of $ _
$32.00 Beta
$32.00 Beta
Name _
Address _
City, State, Zip _
Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine. P.O. Box 1279 • Cave Junction, Oregon 97523About the Author 3
When the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission
authorized me in 1964 to initiate the Civil Defense
Project at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, one of the
first researchers I recruited was Cresson H. Kearny.
Most of his life has been preparation, unplanned and
planned, for writing this guide to help people unfamiliar
with the effects of nuclear weapons improve their
chances of surviving a nuclear attack. During the past
15years he has done an unequaled amount of practical
field work on basic survival problems, without always
conforming to the changing civil defense doctrine.
After I returned to my professional duties at
Princeton in 1966, the civil defense effort at Oak Ridge
:\ational Laboratory was first headed by James C.
Bresee. and is nowheaded by Conrad V. Chester. Both
have wholeheartedly supported Kearny's down-to-
earth research. and Chester was not only a co-
developer of several of the survival items described in
this book, but also participated in the planning of the
experiments testing them.
Kearny's concern with nuclear war dangers began
while he was studying for his degree in civil engineering
at Princeton - he graduated summa cum laude in
1937. His Princeton studies had already acquainted
him with the magnitude of an explosion in which
nuclear energy is liberated, then only a theoretical
possibility. After winning a Rhodes Scholarship,
Kearny earned two degrees in geology at Oxford. Still
before the outbreak of World War II. he observed the
effective preparations made in England to reduce the
effects of aerial attacks. He had a deep aversion to
dictatorships, whetherfrom the right or left, and during
the \1 unich crisis he acted as a courier for an un-
derground group helping anti-Nazis escape from
Czechoslovakia.
Following graduation from Oxford, Kearny did
geological exploration work in the Andes of Peru and
in the jungles of Venezuela. He has traveled also in
Mexico, China. and the Philippines.
A year before Pearl Harbor, realizing that the
United States would soon be at war and that ourjungle
troops should have at least as good personalequipment.
food, and individual medical suppliesas do exploration
geologists. he quit his job with the Standard Oil
Company of Venezuela. returned to the United States,
and went on active duty as an infantry reserve lieutenant.
Kearny was soon assigned to Panama as the Jungle
Experiment Officer of the Panama Mobile Force. In
that capacity he was able to improve orinvent, and then
thoroughly jungle-test, much of the specialized equip-
ment and rations used by our jungle infantrymen in
World War II. Forthis work he was promoted to major
and awarded the Legion of Merit.
To take his chances in combat, in 1944 the author
volunteered for duty with the Office of Strategic
Services. As a demolition specialist helping to limit the
Japanese invasion then driving into the wintry moun-
tains of southern China, he saw mass starvation and
death first hand. Theexperiencesgained in this capacity
also resulted in an increased understanding of both the
physical and emotional problems of people whose
country is under attack.
Worry about the increasing dangers of nuclear
war and America's lack of civil defense caused the
author in 1961 to consult Herman Kahn. a leading
nuclear strategist. Kahn, who was at that time forming
a nonprofit war-research organization, the Hudson
Institute, offered him work as a research analyst. Two
years of civil defense research in this"think tank"made
the author much more knowledgeable of survival
problems.
In 1964 he joined the Oak Ridge civil defense
project and since then Oak Ridge has been Kearny's
base of operations, except for two years during the
height of the Vietnam war. For his Vietnam work on
combat equipment, and also for his contributions to
preparations for improvingsurvivability in the event of
a nuclear war, he received the Army's Decoration for
Distinguished Civilian Service in 1972.
This book draws extensively on Kearny's under-
standing of the problems of civil defense acquired as a
result of his own field testing of shelters and other
survival needs, and also from an intensive study of the
serious civil defense preparations undertaken by other
countries. including Switzerland. Sweden, the USSR,
and China. He initiated and edited the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory translations of Soviet civil defense
handbooks and of a Chinese manual. and gained
additional knowledge from these new sources. Trips to
England, Europe, and Israel also expanded his infor-
mation on survival measures. which contributed to the
Nuclear War Survival Skills. However, the book
advocates principally those do-it-yourself instructions
that field tests have proved to be practical.
Eugene P. Wigner, Physicist. Nobel Laureate. and
the only surviving initiator of the Nuclear Age.
May. 1979Acknowledgments
Theauthortakesthisopportunitytothank
the following personsfortheirspecialcontri-
butions, withoutmany ofwhich itwouldhave
been impossible to have written this book:
L. Joe Deal,James L. Liverman, and W.W.
Schroebelfor the essential supportthey made
possible over the years, first by the U.S.
Atomic Energy Commission, next by the
Energy Research and DevelopmentAdminis-
tration, andthen bythe DepartmentofEnergy.
This support was the basis of the laboratory
work and field testing that produced most of
the survival instructions developed between
1964 and 1979, given in this book. Mr.
Schroebel also reviewed earlyandfinal drafts
and made anumber of improvements.
John A. Auxier, Ph.D.; health physicist,
who for years was Director of the Industrial
Safety and Applied Health Physics Division,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)-for
manuscript review and especially for check-
ing statements regarding the effects of radia-
tion on people.
Conrad V. Chester, Ph.D., chemical en-
gineer, civil defense researcher, developer of
improved defenses against exotic weapons
and unconventional attacks, nuclear strate-
gist, andcurrently Group Leader, Emergency
PlanningGroup, ORNL-foradvice andmany
contributions, startingwiththe initialorgani-
zation ofmaterial and continuingthrough all
the drafts of the original and this edition.
William K. Chipman, LLD, OfficeofCivil
Preparedness, Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency-for review in 1979 of the final
draft of the original ORNL edition.
George A. Cristy, M.S., who for many
years was a chemical engineer and civil
defense researcher at ORNL-for contribu-
tions to the planning of the original edition
and editing of early drafts.
Kay B. Franz, Ph.D., nutritionist, Asso-
ciate Professor, Food Science and Nutrition
Department, Brigham Young University-
for information and advice used extensively
in the Food chapter.
Samuel Glasstone, Ph.D., physical chem-
ist and the leading authority on the effects of
nuclearweapons-foroverallreview andcon-
structive recommendations, especially re-
gardingsimplifiedexplanationsofthe effects
of nuclear weapons.
Carsten M. Haaland, M.S., physicist and
civil defense researcher at ORNL-for scien-
tific advice and mathematical computations
of complex nuclear phenomena.
Robert H. Kupperman, Ph.D., physicist,
in 1979the ChiefScientist, U.S. Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency, Department of
State-for review of the final draft of the 1979
edition.
DavidB. Nelson, Ph.D.,electricalengineer
and mathematician, for years a civil defense
and thermonuclear energy researcher at
ORNL,anauthorityonelectromagneticpulse
(EMP) problems-formanuscriptreview and
contributions to sections on electromagnetic
pulse phenomena, fallout monitoring instru-
ments, and communications.
Lewis V. Spencer,Ph.D.,for manyyears a
physicistwiththeRadiationPhysicsDivision,
Center for Radiation Research, National
Bureau of Standards-for his calculations
and advice regarding needed improvements
in the design of blast shelters to assure
adequate protection of occupants against ex-
cessive exposure to initial nuclear radiation.
Edward Teller, Ph.D., nuclear physicist,
leading inventor of offensive and defensive
weapons, a strong supporter of civil defense
at OakRidge National Laboratory andworld-
wide-forcontributingtheForeword,original-
ly written for the American Security Council
1980 edition, and for his urging which moti-
vated the author to work on this 1987 edition.
Eugene P. Wigner, Ph.D., physicist and
mathematician, Nobel laureate, Professor
Emeritus of Theoretical Physics, Princeton
University,a principalinitiatorofthe Nuclear
Age and a prominent leader of the civil
defensemovement-forencouragingthewrit-
ingofthe originaleditionofthis book, contri-
buting the About the Author section, and
improving drafts, especially of the appendix
on expedient blast shelters.
Edwin N. York, M.S., nuclear physicist,
SeniorResearchEngineer, BoeingAerospace
Company, designer of blast-protective struc-
tures-for overall review and recommenda-
tions, particularly those based on his exten-
siveparticipationinnuclearandconventional
blasttests, andfor improvingboththeoriginal
and this edition.
Civildefense officialsinWashingtonand
several states for information concerning
strengths and weaknesses of official civil
defense preparations.
Helen C. Jernigan for editing the 1979
manuscript, and especially for helping to
clarify technical details for non-technical
readers.
May E. Kearny for her continuinghelp in
editing, and for improving the index.
Ruby N. Thurmer for advice and assis-
tance with editing the original edition.
Marjorie E. Fish for her work on the
photographs and drawings.
Janet Sprouse for typing and typesetting
the additions in the 1987 edition.Introduction
SELF-HELP CIVIL DEFENSE
Your best hope of surviving a nuclear war
in this century is self-help civil defense -
knowing the basic facts about nuclear weapon
effects and what you, your family, and small
groupscando to protectyourselves. OurGovern-
ment continues to downgrade war-related sur-
vival preparations and spends only a few cents
a yearto protecteach Americanagainst possible
wardangers. Duringthe 10yearsormore before
the Strategic Defense Initiative (Star Wars)
weapons can be invented, developed and de-
ployed, self-help civil defense will continue to
be your main hope of surviving if we suffer a
nuclear attack.
Most Americans hope that Star Wars will
lead to the deployment of new weapons capable
of destroying attacking missiles and warheads
in flight. However, no defensive system can be
made leak-proof. If Star Wars, presently only a
research project, leads to a deployed defensive
system, then self-help civil defense will be a
vital part of our hoped for, truly defensive
system to prevent aggressions and to reduce
losses if deterrence fails.
PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF THIS BOOK
This book iswritten for the majority of Americans
who want to improve their chances of surviving a
nuclear war. It brings together field-tested instructions
that have enabled untrained Americans to make
expedient fallout shelters, air pumps to ventilate and
cool shelters, fallout meters, and other expedient life-
support equipment. ("Expedient", as used in civil
defense work, describes equipment that can be made by
untrained citizens in 48 hours or less, while guided
solely by field-tested, written instructions and using
only widely available materials and tools.) Also
described are expedient ways to remove even
dissolved radioiodinefrom water, and to process
and cook whole grains and soybeans, our main
food reserves. Successive versions of these
instructions have been used successfully by
families working under simulated crisis condi-
tions, and have been improved repeatedly by
Oak Ridge National Laboratory civil defense
researchers and others over a periodof 14years.
These improved instructions are the heart of
this updated 1987 edition of the original Oak
Ridge National Laboratory survival book first
published in 1979.
The average American has far too little informa-
tion that would help him and his family and our
country survive a nuclear attack, and many of his
beliefsabout nuclearwar are bothfalseand dangerous.
Since the A-bomb blasted Hiroshima and hurled
mankind into the NuclearAge,only duringa recognized
crisis threatening nuclear war have most Americans
been seriously interested in improving their chances of
surviving a nuclear attack. Both during and following
the Cuban MissileCrisis in 1962, millions of Americans
built fallout shelters or tried to obtain survival infor-
mation. At that time most of the available survival
information was inadequate, and dangerouslyfaulty in
some respects - as it still is in 1987. Widespread
recognition of these civil defense shortcomings has
contributed to the acceptance by most Americans of
one or both of two false beliefs:
One of these false beliefs isthat nuclear war would
be such a terrible catastrophe that it isan unthinkable
impossibility. If this were true, there would be no
logical reason to worry about nuclear war or to make
preparations to survive a nuclear attack.
The second false beliefisthat, ifa nuclearwar were
to break out, it would be the end of mankind. If this
were true, a rational person would not try to improve
his chances of surviving the unsurvivable.
This book gives facts that show these beliefs are
false. History shows that once a weapon is invented it
remains ready for use in the arsenals of some nations
and in time will be used. Researchers who have spent
much time and effort learningthe facts about effects of
nuclear weapons now know that all-out nuclear war
would not be the end of mankind or of civilization.
Even ifour country remained unprepared and were to
besubjected to an all-out nuclearattack, many millions
of Americans would survive and could livethrough the
difficult post-attack years.WHY YOU AND YOUR FAMILY AND
ALMOST ALL OTHER AMERICANS ARE
LEFT UNPROTECTED HOSTAGES TO THE
SOVIET UNION
Unknown to most Americans, our Govern-
ment lacks the defense capabilities that would
enablethe UnitedStatestostopbeingdependent
on a uniquely American strategic policy called
MutualAssuredDestruction(MAD).MADmain-
tains thatif boththe UnitedStatesandRussiado
not or can not adequately protect their people
andessentialindustries,thenneitherwillattack
the other.
An influential minority of Americans still
believethat protectingourcitizens andourvital
industries would accelerate the arms race and
increase the risk of war. No wonder that Presi-
dentReagan's advocacyofthe StrategicDefense
Initiative, derisively called Star Wars, is sub-
jected to impassioned opposition by those who
believethat peaceisthreatenedevenbyresearch
to develop new weapons designed to destroy
weapons launched against us or our allies! No
wonder that even a proposed small increase in
funding for civil defense to save lives if deter-
rence fails arouses stronger opposition from
MAD supporters than do most much larger
expenditures for weapons to kill people!
RUSSIAN, SWISS, AND AMERICAN
CIVIL DEFENSE
No nation other than the United States has
advocated or adopted a strategy that purposely
leaves its citizens unprotected hostages to its
enemies. The rulers of the Soviet Union never
have adopted a MAD strategy and continue to
prepare the Russians to fight, survive, and win
all types of wars. Almost all Russians have
compulsory instructionto teach them aboutthe
effects of nuclear and other mass-destruction
weapons, and whatthey can do to improve their
chances of surviving. Comprehensive prepara-
tions have been made for the crisis evacuation
of urban Russians to rural areas, where they
and ruralRussians wouldmakehigh-protection-
factor expedient fallout shelters. Blast shelters
to protect millions have been built in the cities
and near factories where essential workers
would continue production during a crisis.
Wheat reserves and other foods for war sur-
vivors have been stored outside target areas.
About 100,000 civil defense troops are main-
tained for control, rescue, and post-attack re-
covery duties. The annual per capita cost of
Russian civil defense preparations, if made at
costs equivalentto those inthe United States, is
variously estimated to be between $8 and $20.
Switzerland has the best civil defense sys-
tem, one that already includes blast shelters for
over85 percent of all its citizens. Swiss invest-
ment in this most effective kind of war-risk
insurance has continued steadily for decades.
According to Dr. Fritz Sager, the Vice Director
of Switzerland's civil defense, in 1984 the cost
was the equivalent of $12.60 per capita.
Incontrast,ourFederalEmergencyManage-
ment Agency, that includes nuclear attack
preparedness among its many responsibilities,
will receive only about $126 million in fiscal
1987. This will amountto about55 centsfor each
American. And only a small fraction of this
pittance will be available for nuclear attack
preparedness! Getting out better self-help sur-
vival instructions is about all that FEMA could
afford to' do to improve Americans' chances of
survivinga nuclearwar, unlessFEMA'sfunding
forwar-relatedcivildefenseisgreatlyincreased.
PRACTICALITY OF MAKING SURVIVAL
PREPARATIONS DURING A CRISIS
The emphasis in this book is on survival
preparations that can be made in the last few
days of a worsening crisis. However, the mea-
sures put into effect during such a crisis can be
very much more effective if plans and some
preparations are completed well in advance. It
is hopedthatpersonswhoread this bookwillbe
motivated at least to make the preparations
outlined in Chapter 16, Minimum Pre-Crisis
Preparations.
Well-informedpersonsrealizethata nuclear
attack by the Soviet Union is unlikely to be a
Pearl-Harbor-type of attack, launched without
warning. Strategists agree that a nuclear war
most likely would begin after a period of days-
to-months of worsening crisis. The most realis-
tic of the extensive Russian plans and prepara-
tions to survive a nuclear war are based on
usingatleast severaldaysduringanescalating
crisisto getmost urbandwellersoutofthecities
and other high risk areas, to build or improve
shelters in all parts of the Soviet Union, and to
protect essential machinery and the like. The
Russians know that ifthey are able to complete
evacuation and sheltering plans before the out-
breakofnuclearwar,the numberoftheir people
killed would bea small fraction of those who
otherwise would die. Our satellites and other
sources of intelligence would reveal such mas-
sive movements within a day; therefore, under
the mostlikelycircumstancesAmericanswould
have several days in which to make Iife-saving
preparations.The Russians have learned from the devas-
tating wars they have survived that people are
the most important asset to be saved. Russian
civil defense publications emphasize Lenin's
justly famous statement: "The primary produc-
tive factor of all humanity is the laboring man,
the worker. If he survives, we can save every-
thing and restore everything ... but we shall
perish if we are not able to save him." Strate-
gists conclude that those in power in the Soviet
Union are very unlikely to launch a nuclear
attack until they have protected most of their
people.
The reassurance of having at least a few
days of pre-attack warning, however, is lessen-
ing. The Increasing numbers of Soviet blast
shelters and of first-strike offensive weapons
capableofdestroyingourundefendedretaliatory
weapons will reduce the importance of pre-
attack city evacuation as a means of saving
Russian lives. These ongoing developments
will make it less likely that Americans will
have a few days' warningbefore a Sovietattack,
and therefore should motivate our Government
both to deploy truly defensive Star Wars wea-
pons andto buildblastshelters to protecturban
Americans.
NuclearweaponsthatcouldstriketheUnited
States continue to increase in accuracy as well
as numbers;themostmodernwarheadsusually
can hitwithina few hundredfeet of theirprecise
targets. The Soviet Union already has enough
warheadsto targetallmilitarilyimportantfixed-
site objectives. These include our fixed-site
weapons,commandandcontrolcenters, military
installations, oil refineries and other industrial
plants' that produce war essentials, long run-
ways, and major electric generating plants.
Many of these are either in or near cities.
Because most Americans live in cities that
contain strategically important targets, urban
Americans' best chance of surviving a heavy
nuclear attack is to get out of cities during a
worsening crisis and into fallout shelters away
from probable targets.
Most American civil defense advocates be-
lieve that it would be desirable for our Govern-
mentto buildandstockpermanentblastshelters.
However, such permanent shelters would cost
many tens of billions of dollars and are not
likely to be undertaken as a national objective.
Therefore, field-tested instructions and plans
are needed to enable both urban evacuees and
ruralAmericanstobuildexpedientsheltersand
life-support equipment during a crisis.
SMALLER NUCLEAR ATTACKS
ON AMERICA
Many strategists believe that the United
Statesis morelikelyto suffera relatively small
nuclearattackthanan all-outSovietonslaught.
Thesepossiblesmallernuclearattacksinclude:
• A limited Soviet attack that might result if
Russia'srulersweretoconcludethat an Ameri-
can President would be likely to capitulate
rather than retaliate if a partially disarming
first strike knocked out most of our fixed-site
and retaliatory weapons, but spared the great
majority of our cities. Then tens of millions of
people livingawayfrom missile silosand Stra-
tegic Air Force bases would need only fallout
protection. Even Americans who live in large
metropolitan areas and doubt that they could
successfully evacuate during a nuclear crisis
should realizethatintheeventof sucha limited
attack they would have great need for nuclear
war survival skills.
• An accidental or unauthorized launching of
one or several nuclear weapons that would
explode on America. Complex computerized
weapon systems and/or their human operators
are capable of making lethal errors.
• A small attack on the United States by the
fanatical ruler of an unstable country that may
acquire small nuclear weapons and a pr.imitive
delivery system.
• A terrorist attack, that will be a more likely
possibilityoncenuclearweaponsbecomeavail-
able in unstable nations. Fallout dangers could
extend clear across America. For example, a
singlesmall nuclearweaponexplodedin a West
Coast city would cause lethalfallout hazards to
unshelteredpersonsforseveralmilesdownwind
from the part of the citydevastatedby blast and
fire. It also would result in deposition of fallout
in downwind localities up to hundreds of miles
away, with radiation dose rates hundreds of
timeshigherthanthenormalbackground. Fall-
out would be especially heavy in areas of rain-
out; pregnant women and small children in
those areas, following peacetime standards for
radiation protection, might need to stay shel-
tered for weeks. Furthermore, in localities
spotted across the United States, milk would be
contaminated by radioiodine.
Surely in future years nuclear survival
know-how will become an increasingly impor-
tant part of every prudent person's education.WHY THIS 1987 EDITION?
This updated and augmented edition is
needed to give you:
• Information on how changes since 1979 in
the Soviet nuclear arsenal - especially the
great reductions in the sizes of Russian war-
heads and increases intheir accuracy andnum-
ber - both decrease and increase the dangers
we all face. You need this information to make
logical decisions regarding essentials of your
survival planning, including whether you
should evacuate during a worsening crisis or
buildorimproviseshelteratornearyourhome.
• Instructions for making and using self-help
survival items that have been re-discovered,
invented or improved since 1979. These do-it-
yourselfitems include: (1) DirectionalFanning,
the simplest way to ventilate shelters through
large operiings; (2) the Plywood Double-Action
PistonPump,to ventilatesheltersthroughpipes;
and (3) the improved KFM, the best homemake,
able fallout meter.
• Facts that refute two demoralizing anti-
defense myths that have been conceived and
propagandized since 1979: the myth of blinding
post-attack ultra-violet radiation and the myth
of unsurvivable "nuclear winter".
• Current information on advantages and dis-
advantages, prices, and sources of some manu-
factured survivalitemsfor whichthereis great-
est need.
• Updatedfacts onlowcostsurvivalfoods and
onexpedientmeans for processingandcooking
whole-kernel grains, soybeans, and otherover-
- produced basic foods. Our Government stores
no food as a warreserve andhas not giveneven
civildefense workersthe instructionsneededto
enablesurvivorstomake gooduseofAmerica's
unplanned, poorly distributed, large stocks of
unprocessed foods.
• Updated information on how to obtain and
use prophylactic potassium iodide to protect
your thyroid against injury both from war
fallout, and also from peacetime fallout if the
United States suffers its first commercial nu-
clear power reactor accident releasing life-
endangering radiation.
• Instructions for building, furnishing, and
stocking economical, permanent home fallout
sheltersdesignedfordualuse-ina newchapter.
• Information on what you can do to prevent
sickness if falloutfrom anoverseasnuclearwar
inwhichtheUnitedStatesisnot a belligerentis
blown across the Pacific and deposited on
America - in a new chapter.
EXOTIC WEAPONS
Chemical and biological weapons and neutron
warheads are called "exotic weapons". Protective
measuresagainsttheseweapons arenotempha-
sizedinthisbook, becauseits purpose istohelp
Americans improve their chances ofsurviving
what is by far the most likely type of attack on
the United States: a nuclear attack directed
against war-related strategic targets.
Chemical Weapons are inefficient killing agents
compared to typical nuclear warheads and bombs.
Even if exterminating the unprepared popula-
tion of a specified large area were an enemy's
objective, this would require a delivered pay-
load of deadly chemical weapons many hun-
dreds of times heavier than if large nuclear
weapons were employed.
Biological Weapons are more effective but
less reliable than chemical weapons. They are
more dependent on favorable meteorological
conditions, and could destroy neither our re-
taliatory weapons nor our war-supporting in-
stallations. They could not kill or incapacitate
well protected military personnel manning our
retaliatory weapons. And a biological attack
couldnotprevent,butwouldinvite,U.S.nuclear
retaliatory strikes.
Neutron Warheads are small, yet extremely ex-
pensive.' A I-kiloton neutron warhead costs about as
much as a l-megaton ordinary warhead, but the
ordinarywarhead not onlyhas 1000times the explosive
power but also can be surface-burst to cover a very
large area with deadly fallout.
REWARDS
My greatest reward for writing Nuclear War
SurvivalSkills istherealizationthatthehundreds
of thousands of copies of the original edition
which have been sold since 1979 already have
provided many thousands of people with sur-
vival information that may save their lives.
Especially rewarding have been the thanks of
readers - particularlymotherswith smallchil-
dren - for having giventhemhopeofsurviving
a nuclear war. Rekindled, realistic hope has
caused some readers to work to improve their
andtheirfamilies' chancesof surviving,ranging
from making preparations to evacuate high
risk areas during an all too possible worsening
crisis,to buildingandstockingpermanentshel-
ters.
Because I wrote the original Nuclear War
Survival Skills while working at Oak Ridge
NationalLaboratoryattheAmericantaxpayers'expense, I have no proprietory interesteitherin
the original 1979 Government edition or in any
of the privately printed reproductions. I have
gottennothingbutsatisfactionfrom the reported
sales of over 400,000 copies privately printed
and sold between 1979 and 1987. Nor will I
receive any monetaryreward inthe future from
my effortsto give bettersurvival instructionsto
people who want to improve their chances of
surviving a nuclear attack.
AVAILABILITY
None of the material that appeared in the
original Oak Ridge National Laboratory un-
copyrighted 1979 edition can be covered by a
legitimate copyright; it can be reproduced by
anyone, without receiving permission. Much
new material, which I have written since my
retirement in 1979 from Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, has been added, and is printed in a
different type. To assure that this new material
also can be made widely available to the public
at low cost, without getting permission from or
paying anyone, I have copyrighted my new
material in the unusual way specified by this
1987 edition's copyright notice.
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS
Work to persuade the President, your Con-
gressmen, your Senators, and other leaders to
supportimprovednuclearwarsurvivalprepara-
tions, starting with increased funding for war-
related civil defense. Urge them to approve and
fund the early deployment of truly defensive
weaponsthattests alreadyhave provencapable
of destroyingsomewarheadsinflight. (Attempts
todevelop perfectdefenses postpone orprevent
the attainment of improved defenses.)
Obtain and study the best survival instruc-
tions available long before a crisis occurs.
Better yet, also make preparations, such as the
onesdescribedinthis book,toincreaseyourand
your family's chances of surviving.
During a crisis threatening nuclear attack,
presentuncertaintiesregardingthedistribution
of reliable survival information seem likely to
continue. Thoroughly field-tested survival in-
structions are not likely to be available to most
Americans..Furthermore, even a highly intelli-
gent citizen, if given excellent instructions
during a crisis, would not have time to learn
basic facts about nuclear dangers and the rea-
sonsfor various survivalpreparations. Without
this understanding, no one can do his best at
following any type of survival instructions.
Byfollowing the instructions inthis book, you and
your family can increase the odds favoring your
survival. If such instructions were made widely avail-
able from official sources, and if our Government
urged all Americansto follow them duringa worsening
crisis lasting atleast several days, additional millions
would survive an attack. And the danger of an attack,
even the threat of an attack, could be decreased if an
enemy nation knew that wehad significantly improved
our defenses in this way.Chapter 1
The Dangers from Nuclear Weapons: Myths and Facts
An all-out nuclear war between Russia and the
United States would be the worst catastrophe in
history, a tragedy so huge it is difficult to compre-
hend. Even so, it would be farfrom the end of human
life on earth. The dangers from nuclearweapons have
been distorted and exaggerated, for varied reasons.
These exaggerations have become demoralizing
myths. believed by millions, of Americans.
While working with hundreds of Americans
building expedient shelters and life-support equip-
ment. I have found that many people at first see no
sense in talking about details of survivalskills. Those
who hold exaggerated beliefs about the dangers from
nuclear weapons must first beconvinced that nuclear
war would not inevitably be the end of them and
everything worthwhile. Only after they have begun to
question the truth of these myths do they become
interested, under normal peacetime conditions, in
acquiring nuclear war survival skills. Therefore,
before giving detailed instructions for making and
using survival equipment, we will examine the most
harmful of the myths about nuclear war dangers,
along with some of the grim facts.
• Myth: Fallout radiation from a nuclear war
would poison the airand all parts of the environment.
It would kill everyone. (This is the demoralizing
message of On the Beach and many similar pseudo-
scientific books and articles.)
• Facts: When a nuclear weapon explodes near
enough to the ground for its fireball to touch the
ground, it forms a crater. (See Fig. I.I.) Many
ORNL-DWG 78-6264
WIND
Fig. 1.1. A surface burst. Ina surface or near-surface burst, the fireball touches the ground and blasts a crater.IL
thousands of tons of earth from the crater of a large
explosion are pulverized into trillions of particles.
These particles are contaminated by radioactive
atoms produced by the nuclear explosion. Thou-
sands of tons of the particles are carried up into a
mushroom-shaped cloud, miles above the earth.
These radioactive particles then fall out of the
mushroom cloud, or out of the dispersing cloud of
particles blown by the winds-thus becoming fallout.
Each contaminated particle continuouslygivesoff
invisible radiation, much like a tiny X-ray machine-
while in the mushroom cloud, while descending, and
after having fallen to earth. The descending radioactive
particlesare carried bythe winds likethe sand and dust
particles ofa miles-thick sandstormcloud-except that
they usually are blown at lower speeds and in many
areas the particlesare so far apart that no cloud isseen.
The largest, heaviest fallout particles reach the ground
first, in locations close to the explosion. Many smaller
particles are carried by the winds for tens to thousands
of miles before falling to earth. At anyone place where
fallout from a singleexplosion isbeingdeposited on the
ground in concentrations high enough to require the
use of shelters, deposition will be completed within a
few hours.
The smallest fallout particles-those tiny enough
to be inhaled into a person's lungs-are invisible to the
naked eye. These tiny particles would fall so slowly
from the four-mile or greater heights to which
1000 1000 R/hr
1 hr AFTER
900
800
700
.c 6002
w
I- 500<ta:W(J)
0 4000
300
200
100
they would be injected by currently deployed
Soviet warheads that most would remain air-
borne for weeks to years before reaching the
ground.Bythattimetheirextremelywidedisper-
sal and radioactive decay would make them
much lessdangerous. Only where suchtiny par-
ticles are promptly brought to earth by rain-
outs or snow-outs in scattered "hot spots," and
laterdried and blown about bythe winds, would
these invisible particles constitute a long-term
and relatively minor post-attack danger.
The air in properly designed fallout shelters,
even those without air filters, is free of radioactive
particles and safe to breathe except in a few rare
environments-as will be explained later.
Fortunately for all living things, the dangerfrom
fallout radiation lessens with time. The radioactive
decay, as this lessening iscalled, is rapid at first, then
gets slower and slower. The dose rate (the amount of
radiation received per hour) decreases accordingly.
Figure 1.2' illustrates the rapidity of the decay of
radiation from fallout during the first two days after
the nuclear explosion that produced it. R stands for
roentgen, a measurement unit often used to measure
exposure to gamma rays and X rays. Fallout meters
called dosimeters measure the dose received by
recording the number of R. Fallout meters called
survey meters, or dose-rate meters, measure the dose
rate by recording the number of R being received per
hour at the time of measurement. Notice that it takes
about seven times as long for the dose rate to decay
ORNL·DWG 78-6265
48
HOURS AFTER THE EXPLOSION
Fig. 1.2. Decay of the dose rate of radiation from fallout, from the time
of the explosion, not from the time of fallout deposition.from 1000roentgens per hour (1000 R/ hr) to 10R/hr
(48 hours) as to decay from 1000 Rj hr to 100R/hr(7
hours). (Only in high-fallout areas would the dose
rate I hour after the explosion be as high as 1000
roentgens per hour.)
If the dose rate I hour after an explosion is 1000
R hr, it would take about 2weeks for the dose rate to
be reduced to I R/ hr solely as a result of radioactive
decay. Weathering effects will reduce the dose rate
further; for example, rain can wash fallout particles
from plants and houses to lower positions on or
closer to the ground. Surrounding objects would
reduce the radiation dose from these low-lying
particles.
Figure 1.2 also illustrates the fact that at a
typical location where agiven amount offalloutfrom
an explosion is deposited later than I hour after the
explosion, the highest dose rate and the total dose
received at that location are less than at a location
where the same amount of fallout isdeposited I hour
after the explosion. The longer fallout particles have
been airborne before reaching the ground, the less
dangerous is their radiation.
Within two weeks after an attack the occupants
of most shelters could safely stop using them, or
could work outside the shelters for an increasing
number of hours each day. Exceptions would be in
areas of extremely heavy fallout such as might occur
downwind from important targets attacked with
many weapons, especially missile sites and very large
cities. To know when to come out safely, occupants
either would need a reliable fallout meter to measure
the changing radiation dangers, or must receive
information based on measurements made nearby
with a reliable instrument.
The radiation dose that will kill a person varies
considerably with different people. A dose of 450 R
resulting from exposure of the whole body to fallout
radiation is often said to be the dose that will kill
about half the persons receiving it, although most
studies indicate that it would take somewhat less.'
(Note: A number written after a statement refers the
reader to a source listed in the Selected References
that follow Appendix D.) Almost all persons
confined to expedient shelters after a nuclear attack
would be under stress and without clean surround-
ings or antibiotics to fight infections. Many also
would lack adequate water and food. Under these
unprecedented conditions, perhaps half the persons
who received a whole-body dose of 350 R within a few
days would die.'
Fortunately, the human body can repair most
radiation damage if the daily radiation doses are not
too large. As will be explained in Appendix B, a
person who is healthy and has not been exposed in
the past two weeks to a total radiation dose of more
than 100 R can receive a dose of 6 R each day for at
least two months without being incapacitated.
Only a very small fraction of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki citizens who survived radiation doses-
some of which were nearly fatal-have suffered
serious delayed effects. The reader should realize that
to do essential work after a massive nuclear attack,
many survivors must be willing to receive much
larger radiation doses than are normally permissible.
Otherwise, too many workers would stay inside
shelter too much of the time, and work that would be
vital to national recovery could not be done. For
example, if the great majority of truckers were so
fearful of receiving even non-incapacitating radiation
doses that they would refuse to transport food,
additional millions would die from starvation alone.
• Myth: Fallout radiation penetrates everything;
there is no escaping its deadly effects.
• Facts: Some gamma radiation from fallout will
penetrate the shielding materials of even an excellent
shelter and reach its occupants. However, the
radiation dose' that the occupants of an excellent
shelter would receive while inside this shelter can be
reduced to a dose smaller than the average American
receives during his lifetime from X rays and other
radiation exposures normal in America today. The
design features of such a shelter include the use of a
sufficient thickness of earth or other heavy shielding
material. Gamma rays are like X rays, but more
penetrating. Figure 1.3 shows how rapidly gamma
rays are reduced in number (but not intheirability to
penetrate) by layers of packed earth. Each of the
layers shown is one halving-thickness of packed
earth-about 3.6 inches (9 centimeters).' A halving-
thickness is the thickness of a material which reduces
by half the dose of radiation that passes through it.
The actual paths ofgamma rays passingthrough
shielding materials are much more complicated, due
to scattering, etc., than are the straight-line paths
shown in Fig. 1.3. But when averaged out, the
effectiveness of a halving-thickness of any material is
approximately as shown. The densera substance, the
better it serves for shielding material. Thus, a
halving-thickness of concrete is only about 2.4 inches
(6.1 ern).ORNL-DWG 78-18834
r
5 HALVING·THICKNESSESOFI
PACKED EARTH =18 INCHES
(45 eml
16 in. Uin. Uin. Uin. 16 in.
~~ ~~ ~~ ~~ ~~
~
P0 G G7 77":i
I.
i
(..:
!> li:i...
iii
~< I::.. 'i<i\i-.: f/
:<i<i
~c;;c
hi <i
flY
I' ..
hi/ :.:.
i I/ii.< r ..•..••••.,
I , it? / iii:.'·.·· >L t,.,·,
;!1'1
.' <: ....... .........,
/ i :.'S i:i: >
•
I:
.... :.:.
'Q~
. ..
;)i
.:'I: ... <c
[iii ,< ... :
.:.'.'.' ..'
c,.
i/ -"::.
Ix·...
r .
:...
'iii
::..
I
:....
•••--.;. l...- "-- '--
1/32
32
1/16
16
4
1/8
8
8
1/4
4
16
1/2
32 GAMMA RAYS
REDUCTIONS IN
GAMMA RAYS
PROTECTION
FACTORS
Fig. 1.3. Illustration of shieldingagainst fallout radiation. Note the increasingly large improvements inthe
attenuation (reduction) factors that are attained as each additional halving-thickness of packed earth isadded.
If additional halving-thicknesses of packed
earth shielding are successively added to the five
thicknesses shown in Fig. 1.3, the protection factor
(PF) issuccessively increased from 32to 64, to 128,to
256, to 512, to 1024, and so on.
• Myth: A heavy nuclear attack would set
practically everything on fire, causing"firestorms"in
cities that would exhaust the oxygen in the air. All
shelter occupants would be killed by the intense heat.
• Facts: On a clear day, thermal pulses (heat
radiation that travelsat the speed oflight)from an air
burst can set fire to easily ignitable materials (such as
window curtains, upholstery, dry newspaper, and dry
grass) over about as large an area as is damaged by
the blast. It can cause second-degree skin burns to
exposed people who are as far as ten miles from
a one-megaton (I MT) explosion. (See Fig. 1.4.)
(A I-MT nuclear explosion is one that produces the
same amount of energy as does one million tons of
TNT.) Ifthe weather is very clear and dry, the area of
fire danger could be considerably larger. On a cloudy
or smoggy day, however, particles in the air would
absorb and scatter much of the heat radiation, and
the area endangered by heat radiation from the
fireball would be less than the area of severe blast
damage.ORNL-DWG 78-6267
Fig. 1.4. An air burst. The fireball does not touch
the ground. No crater. An air burst produces only
extremelysmallradioactive particles-sosmall
that they are airborne for days to years unless
broughtto earth by rainor snow. Wetdeposition
of fallout from both surface and air bursts can
result in "hot spots" at, close to. or far from
ground zero. However, such "hot spots" from
air bursts are much less dangerous than the
fallout produced by the surface or near-surface
bursting of the same weapons.
The main dangers from an air burst are the blast
effects, the thermal pulses of intense light and heat
radiation, and the very penetrating initial nuclear
radiation from the fireball.
"Firestorrns"could occur only when the concentra-
tion of combustible structures is very high, as in the
verydense centers ofa fewold American cities. At rural
and suburban building densities, most people in earth-
covered fallout shelters would not have their lives
endangered by fires.
• Myth: In the worst-hit parts of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki where all buildings were demolished, every-
one was killed by blast, radiation, or fire.
• Facts: In Nagasaki, some people survived un-
injured who were far inside tunnel shelters built for
conventional air raids and located as close as one-third
mile from ground zero (the point directly below the
explosion). This was true even though these long, large
shelters lacked blast doors and were deep inside the
zone within which all buildings weredestroyed. (People
far inside long, large, open shelters are better protected
than are those inside small, open shelters.)
Fig. 1.5. Undamaged earth-covered family
shelter in Nagasaki.
Many earth-covered family shelters were essen-
tiallyundamaged inareas where blast and firedestroyed
all buildings. Figure 1.5shows a typical earth-covered,
backyard family shelter with a crude wooden frame.
This shelter was essentially undamaged, although less
than 100 yards from ground zero at Nagasaki.' The
calculated maximum overpressure (pressure above the
normal air pressure) was about 65 pounds per square
inch (65 psi). Persons inside so small a shelterwithouta
blast door would have been killed by blast pressure at
this distance from the explosion. However, in a recent
blast test,' an earth-covered, expedient Small-Pole
Shelter equipped with blast doors was undamaged at
53 psi. The pressure rise inside was slight-not even
enough to have damaged occupants'eardrums. Ifpoles
are available, field tests have indicated that many
families can build such shelters in a few days.
The great life-saving potential of blast-protective
shelters has been proven in war and confirmed by blast
tests and calculations. For example, the area in which
the air bursting of a l-megaton weapon would wreck a
50-psishelterwith blast doors inabout 2.7square miles.
Within this roughly circular area, practically all the
occupants of wrecked shelters would be killed by blast,
carbon monoxide from fires, or radiation. The same
blast effects would kill most people who were using
basements affording 5 psi protection, over an area of
about 58 square miles."
• Myth: Because some modern H-bombs are over
1000times as powerful as the A-bomb that destroyed
most of Hiroshima, these H-bombs are 1000times as
deadly and destructive.
• Facts: A nuclear weapon 1000times as powerful
as the one that blasted Hiroshima, if exploded under
comparable conditions, produces equally serious
blast damage to wood-frame houses over an area upto about 130times as large, not 1000times as large. For
example, air bursting a 20-kiloton weapon at
the optimum height to destroy most buildings
will destroy or severely damage houses out to
about 1.42milesfrom ground zero."The circular
area of at least severe blast damage will be
about 6.33 square miles. (The explosion of a 20
kiloton weapon releases the same amount of
energy as 20 thousand tons of TNT.) One thou-
sand 20-kiloton weapons thus air burst, well
separated to avoid overlap of their blast areas,
would destroy or severely damage houses over
areastotalingapproximately6,330 squaremiles.
In contrast, similar air bursting of one 20-
megatonweapon(equivalentinexplosivepower
to 20 million tons of TNT) would destroy or
severely damage the great majority of houses
out to a distance of 16 miles from ground zero.s
The area of destruction would be about 800
square miles - not 6,330 square miles.
Today few if any of Russia's huge inter-
continentalballisticmissiles(ICBMs) are armed
witha 20-megatonwarhead. Nowa huge Russian
ICBM, the SS-18,typically carries 10 warheads,
each having a yield of 500 kilotons, each pro-
grammed to hit a separate target. See Jane's
Weapon Systems, 1987-88.
• Myth:A RussiannuclearattackontheUnited
States would completely destroy all American
cities.
• Facts: As longas Sovietleaders are rational
they willcontinueto givefirst prioritytoknock-
ing out our weapons and other military assets
that can damage Russia and kill Russians. To
explode enough nuclear weapons of any size to
completely destroy American cities would be
an irrational waste of warheads. The Soviets
can make much better use of most of the war-
. heads that would be required to completely
destroy American cities; the majority of those
warheadsprobablyalreadyaretargetedto knock
out our retaliatory missiles by being surface
burst or near-surface burst on their hardened
silos, located far from most cities and densely
populated areas.
Unfortunately, many militarily significant
targets - including naval vessels in port and
port facilities, bombers and fighters on the
ground, air base and airport facilities that can
be used by bombers, Army installations, and
key defense factories - are in or close to
American cities. Inthe eventof an all-outSoviet
attack, most of these "soft" targets would be
destroyed by air bursts. Air bursting (see Fig.
1.4) a given weapon subjects about twice as
large an area to blast effects severe enough to
destroy "soft" targets as does surface bursting
(see Fig. 1.1) the same weapon. Fortunately for
Americans living outside blast and fire areas,
air bursts produce only very tiny particles.
Mostof theseextremelysmallradioactiveparti-
cles remain airborne for so long that their
radioactive decay and wide dispersal before
reaching the ground make them much less life-
endangeringthanthe promptlydepositedlarger
fallout particles from surface and near-surface
bursts. However, if you are a survival minded
American you should prepare to survive heavy
fallout wherever you are. Unpredictable winds
may bring fallout from unexpected directions.
Or your area may be in a "hot spot" of life-
endangering fallout caused by a rain-out or
snow-out of both small and tiny particles from
distant explosions. Or the enemy may use sur-
face or near-surface bursts in your part of the
country to crater long runways or otherwise
disrupt U.S. retaliatory actions by producing
heavy local fallout.
Today few if any of Russia's largest inter-continentalballisticmissiles (ICBMs) arearmed
with a 20-megaton warhead. A huge Russian
ICBM, the SS-18, typically carries 10 warheadseach having a yield of 500 kilotons, each pro-
grammed to hit a separate target. See Jane's
Weapon Systems, 1987-1988. However, in March
1990 CIA Director William Webstertold the U.S.Senate Armed Services Committee that"...The
USSR's strategic modernization program con-tinues unabated," and that the SS-18 Mod 5 cancarry 14 to 20 nuclear warheads. The warheads
are generally assumed to be smaller than thoseof the older SS-18s.
• Myth: So much food and waterwillbepoisoned by
fallout that people will starve and die even in fallout
areas where there is enough food and water.
• Facts: Ifthe fallout particlesdo not become mixed
with the parts of food that are eaten, no harm isdone.
Food and water in dust-tight containers are not con-
taminated by fallout radiation. Peeling fruits and vege-
tables removes essentially all fallout, as does removing
the uppermost several inches of stored grain onto
which fallout particles have fallen. Water from many
sources - such as deep wells and covered reservoirs,
tanks, and containers - would not be contaminated.
Even water containing dissolved radioactive elements
and compounds can be made safe for drinking by
simply filtering it through earth, as described later in
this book.
• Myth: Most of the unborn children and grand-
children of people who have been exposed to radiation
from nuclearexplosions willbegenetically damaged -
will be malformed, delayed victims of nuclear war.
• Facts: The authoritative study by the National
Academy of Sciences, A Thirty Year Study of the
Survivors ofHiroshima and Nagasaki, was published
in 1977.Itconcludesthatthe incidence ofabnormalities
is no higher among children later conceived by parents
who were exposed to radiation during the attacks on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki than is the incidence of
abnormalities among Japanese children born to un-
exposed parents.
This is not to say that there would be no genetic
damage, nor that some fetuses subjected to large
radiation doses would not be damaged. But the
overwhelmingevidence does show thatthe exaggerated
fears of radiationdamage to future generationsare not
supported by scientific findings.
• Myth: Overkill would result if all the U.S. and
U.S.S.R. nuclear weapons were used - meaning not
only that the two superpowers have more than enough
weapons to killall of each other's people, but also that
they have enough weapons to exterminate the human
race.• Facts: Statements that the U.S. and the Soviet
Union have the power to kill the world's population
several times over are based on misleading calculations.
One such calculation isto multiply the deaths produced
per kiloton exploded over Hiroshima or Nagasaki by
an estimate of the number of kilotons in either side's
arsenal. (A kiloton explosion is one that produces the
same amount ofenergy as does 1000tons ofTNT.) The
unstated assumption is that somehow the world's
population could be gathered into circular crowds,
each a few miles in diameter with a population density
equal to downtown Hiroshima or Nagasaki, and thena
small (Hiroshima-sized) weapon would be exploded
over the center of each crowd. Other misleading
calculations are based on exaggerations of the dangers
from long-lastingradiationand otherharmfuleffectsof
a nuclear war.
• Myth: Blindnessand a disastrousincreaseof
cancers would be the fate of survivors of a
nuclear war, because the nuclear explosions
would destroy so much of the protective ozone
inthe stratospherethatfar too muchultraviolet
light would reach the earth's surface. Even
birds and insects would be blinded. Peoplecould
not work outdoors in daytime for years without
dark glasses, andwouldhavetowearprotective
clothing to prevent incapacitating sunburn.
Plants would be badly injured and food produc-
tion greatly reduced.
• Facts: Large nuclear explosions do inject
huge amounts of nitrogen oxides (gasses that
destroy ozone) into the stratosphere. However,
the percentof the stratosphericozonedestroyed
by a given amount of nitrogen oxides has been
greatly overestimated in almost all theoretical
calculations and models. For example, the
SovietandU.S. atmospheric nucleartestexplo-
sions of large weapons in 1952-1962 were calcu-
lated by Foley and Ruderman to result in a
reduction of morethan 10percentintotal ozone.
(See M. H. Foley and M. A. Ruderman, "Strato-
spheric NO from Past Nuclear Explosions",
Journal of Geophysics, Res. 78, 4441-4450.) Yet
observations that they cited showed no reduc-
tions in ozone. Nor did ultraviolet increase.
Other theoreticians calculated sizeable reduc-
tions in total ozone, but interpreted the obser-
vational data to indicate either no reduction, or
much smaller reductions than their calculated
ones.
A realistic simplified estimate of the in-
creased ultraviolet light dangers to American
survivors of a large nuclear war equates these
hazards to moving from San Francisco to sea
level at the equator, where the sea level inci-
denceof skincancers(seldomfatal) ishighest-
about 10 times higher than the incidence at San
Francisco.Manyadditionalthousandsof Ameri-
can survivors might get skin cancer, but little
or no increase in skin cancers might result if in
the post-attack world deliberate sun tanning
and going around hatless went out of fashion.
Furthermore, almost all of today's warheads
are smaller than those exploded in the large-
weapons tests mentioned above; most would
inject much smaller amounts of ozone-destroy-
ing gasses, or no gasses, into the stratosphere,
where ozone deficiencies may persistfor years.
Andnuclearweapons smallerthan500 kilotons
result in increases (due to smog reactions) in
upper tropospheric ozone. In a nuclear war,
these increases would partiallycompensate for
the upper-level tropospheric decreases-as ex-
plained by Julius S. Chang and Donald J.
Wuebbles of Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory.
• Myth: Unsurvivable"nuclearwinter" surely
will follow a nuclear war. The world will be
frozen if only 100 megatons (less than one
percent of all nuclear weapons) are used to
.ignitecities.World-envelopingsmokefromfires
and the dust from surface bursts will prevent
almostall sunlightandsolarheatfrom reaching
the earth's surface. Universal darkness for
weeks! Sub-zerotemperatures,eveninsummer-
time! Frozencrops, eveninthe junglesofSouth
America! Worldwide famine! Whole species of
animals and plants exterminated! The survival
of mankind in doubt!
• Facts: Unsurvivable "nuclear winter" is a
discredited theory that, since its conception in
1982, has been used to frighten additional
millions into believing that trying to survive a
nuclear war is a waste of effort and resources,
and that only by ridding the world of almost all
nuclear weapons do we have a chance of sur-
viving.
Non-propagandizing scientists recently
have calculated that the climatic and other
environmentaleffects of evenanall-outnuclear
war would be much less severe than the catas-
trophiceffectsrepeatedlypublicizedbypopular
astronomer Carl Sagan and his fellow activist
scientists, and by all the involved Soviet scien-
tists. Conclusions reached from these recent,
realistic calculations are summarized in an
article,"NuclearWinterReappraised",featured
in the 1986 summerissueof Foreign Affairs,the
prestigiousquarterlyof the CouncilonForeign
Relations. The authors, Starley L. Thompson
and Stephen H. Schneider, are atmospheric
scientists with the National Center for Atmos-
pheric Research. They showed " . . . that on
scientific grounds the global apocalyptic con-
clusionsof theinitialnuclearwinterhypothesis
can nowberelegatedto a vanishinglowlevel of
probability." Their models indicate that in July
(when the greatest temperature reductionswould result) the average temperature in the
United States would be reduced for a few days
from about 70 degrees Fahrenheit to approxi-
mately 50 degrees. (In contrast, underthe same
conditions Carl Sagan, his associates, and the
Russian scientistspredicteda resultingaverage
temperature of about 10 degrees below zero
Fahrenheit, lasting for many weeks!)
Persons who want to learn more about
possiblepost-attackclimaticeffects alsoshould
read the Fall 1986 issue of Foreign Affairs. This
issue containsa longletterfrom Thompson and
Schneider which further demolishes the theory
of catastrophic "nuclear winter." Continuing
studies indicate there will be even smaller
reductions intemperaturethanthosecalculated
by Thompson and Schneider.
Soviet propagandists promptly exploited
belief in unsurvivable "nuclear winter" to
increase fear of nuclear weapons and war, and
to demoralize their enemies. Because raging
city firestorms are needed to inject huge
amounts of smoke into the stratosphere and
thus, according to one discredited theory, pre-
vent almost all solar heat from reaching the
ground, the Soviets changed their descriptions
of how a modern city will burn if blasted by a
nuclear explosion.
Figure 1.6 pictures how Russian scientists
andcivildefenseofficialsrealisticallydescribed
- beforetheinventionof "nuclearwinter" - the
burning of a city hit by a nuclear weapon.
Buildings in the blasted area for miles around
ground zero will be reduced to scattered rubble
- mostly of concrete, steel, and other non-
flammable materials - that will not burn in
blazing fires. Thus in the Oak Ridge National
Laboratorytranslation (ORNL-TR-2793) of Civil
Defense, SecondEdition(500,000copies),Moscow,
1970, by Egorov, Shlyakhov, and Alabin, we
read: "Fires do not occur in zones of complete
destruction . . . that are characterized by an
overpressure exceeding0.5 kg/cm2 [- 7 psi] ...
becauserubbleisscatteredandcoverstheburn-
ing structures. As a result the rubble only
smolders, and fires as such do not occur."
Translation: [Radioactive] contamination occurs in the area of the explosion and also
along the trajectory of the cloud which forms a radioactive track.
Fig. 1.6. Drawing with Caption in a Russian Civil Defense Training Film Strip. The
blazing fires ignited by a surface burst are shown in standing buildings outside the
miles-wide"zoneof completedestruction," wherethe blast-hurled"rubbleonlysmolders."Firestorms destroyed the centers of Ham-
burg, Dresden, and Tokyo. The old-fashioned
buildingsofthosecitiescontainedlargeamounts
of flammable materials, were ignited by many
thousands of small incendiaries, and burned
quickly as standing structures well supplied
with air. No firestorm has ever injected smoke
into the stratosphere, or caused appreciable
cooling below its smoke cloud.
The theory that smoke from burning cities
and forests and dust from nuclear explosions
would cause worldwide freezing temperatures
was conceived in 1982 by the German atmos-
pheric chemist and environmentalist Paul
Crutzen, and continues to be promoted by a
worldwide propaganda campaign. This well
funded campaign began in 1983 with televised
scientific-political meetings in Cambridge and
Washington featuring American and Russian
scientists. A barrage of newspaper and maga-
zine articles followed, including a scare-
mongering article by Carl Sagan inthe October
30, 1983 issue ofParade, the Sundaytabloidread
by millions. The most influential article was
featured intheDecember23, 1983issueofScience
(theweekly magazineofthe AmericanAssocia-
tion for the Advancement ofScience): "Nuclear
winter, globalconsequencesofmultiplenuclear
explosions," byfive scientists, R. P. Turco, O. B.
Toon, T. P. Ackerman, J. B. Pollack, and C.
Sagan. Significantly,these activistsIrstedtheir
names to spell TTAPS, pronounced "taps," the
buglecall proclaiming"lightsout" ortheendof
a military funeral.
Until 1985, non-propagandizing scientists
did not begin to effectively refute the numerous
errors, unrealistic assumptions, and computer
modelingweaknessesofthe TTAPS and related
"nuclearwinter"hypotheses. A principalreason
is that government organizations, private cor-
porations, and most scientists generally avoid
getting involved in political controversies, or
making statements likely to enable antinuclear
activists to accuse them of minimizingnuclear
wardangers,thusundermininghopesfor peace.
Stephen Schneider has been called a fascist by
some disarmament supporters for having writ-
ten "NuclearWinterReappraised," accordingto
the Rocky Mountain News ofJuly6,1986. Three
dayslater,thispaper,thatuntilrecentlyfeatured
accounts of unsurvivable "nuclear winter,"
criticized Carl Sagan and defended Thompson
and Schneider in its lead editorial, "In Study of
NuclearWinter, LetScientists BeScientists." In
a free country, truth will out - although some-
times too late to effectively counter fast-hitting
propaganda,
Effective refutationof"nuclearwinter" also
was delayed bythe prestige ofpoliticians andof
politically motivated scientists and scientific
organizations endorsing the TTAPS forecast of
worldwide doom. Furthermore, the weaknesses
intheTTAPShypothesiscouldnotbeeffectively
explored until adequate Government funding
was made available to cover costs of lengthy,
expensive studies, including improved com-
puter modeling of interrelated, poorly under-
stood meteorological phenomena.
Serious clirnatic effects from a Soviet-U.S.
nuclear war cannot be completely ruled out.
However, possible deaths from uncertain cli-
matic effects are a small danger compared to
the uncalculable millions in many countries
likely to die from starvation caused by disas-
trous shortages of essentials of modern agri-
culture sure to result from a Soviet-American
nuclear war, and by the cessation of most
international food shipments.Chapter 2
Psychological Preparations
LEARNING WHAT TO EXPECT
The more one knows about the strange and
fearful dangers from nuclear weapons and about the
strengths and weaknesses of human beings when
confronted with the dangers of war, the betterchance
one has of surviving. Terror, a self-destructive
emotion, is almost always the result of unexpected
danger. Some people would think the end of the
world was upon them if they happened to be in an
area downwind from surface bursts of nuclear
weapons that sucked millions of tons of pulverized
earth into the air. They might give up all hope ifthey
did not understand what they saw. People are more
likely to endure and survive if they learn in advance
that such huge dust clouds, particularly ifcombined
with smoke from great fires, may turn day into
night-as have some volcanic eruptions and the
largest forest fires.
People also should expect thunder to crash in
strange clouds, and the earth to shake. The sky may
be lit with the flickering purples and greens of
"artificial auroras" caused by nuclear explosions,
especially those that are miles above the earth.
FEAR
Fear often is a life-saving emotion. When we
believe death is close at hand, fear can increase our
ability to work harder and longer. Driven byfear, we
can accomplish feats that would be impossible
otherwise. Trembling hands, weak legs, and cold
sweat do not mean that a person has become
ineffective. Doing hard, necessary work isone of the
best ways to keep one's fears under control.
Brave men and women who are self-confident
admit their fears, even when the threat of death is
remote. Then they plan and work to lessen the causes
of their fears. (When the author helped Charles A.
Lindbergh design a reinforced-concrete blast shelter
for his family and neighbors, Lindbergh frankly
admitted that hefeared both nuclearattackand being
trapped. He was able to lessen both of these fears by
building an excellent blast shelter with two escape
openings.)
TERROR
If the danger is unexpected enough or great
enough, normal persons sometimesexperience terror
as well as fear. Terror prevents the mind from
evaluatingdangersand thinking logically. Itdevelops
in two stages, which have been described by Dr. Walo
von Gregerz, a physician with much war experience,
in his book Psychology ofSurvival. The first stage is
apathy: people become indifferentto their own safety
and are unable even to try to save themselves or their
families. The second stage is a compulsion to flee.
Anxiety, fear, and terror can result insymptoms
very similar to those caused by radiation injury:
nausea, vomiting, extreme trembling, diarrhea. Dr.
von Gregerz has described terror as being "explo-
sively contagious." However, persons who learn to
understand the nature of our inherent human traits
and behavior and symptoms are lesslikely to become
terrorized and ineffective in the event of a nuclear
attack.
EMOTIONAL PARALYSIS
The most common reaction to great danger is
not terror, but a kind of numbing of the emotions
which actually may be helpful. Dr. von Gregerz calls
this "emotional paralysis."This reaction allows many
persons, when in the grip of great danger, to avoid
being overwhelmed by compassionate emotions andhorrible sights. It permits them to think clearly and
act effectively.
ATOM BOMB SURVIVORS
The atomic explosions that destroyed most of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki were air bursts and
therefore produced no deadly local fallout. So we
cannot be sure how people would behave in areas
subjected to both blast and fallout from surface
bursts. However, the reactions of the Japanese
survivors are encouraging, especially in view of the
fact that among them the relative numberof horribly
burned people was greater than is likely to be found
amonga population that expects a nuclearattack and
takes any sort of shelter. Dr. von Gregerz summa-
rizes: "In most cases the victims were, of course,
apathetic and often incapable of rational action, but
open panic or extremely disorganized behavior
occurred only in exceptional cases among the
hundreds of thousands ofsurvivors of the two atomic
bombing attacks." Also encouraging: "... serious
permanent psychological derangements were rare
after the atomic bomb attacks, just as they wereafter
the large-scale conventional bombings."
HELP FROM FELLOW AMERICANS
Some maintain that after an atomic attack
America would degenerate into anarchy-s-an every-
man-for-himself struggle for existence. They forget
the history of great human catastrophes and the self-
sacrificing strengths most human beings are capable
of displaying. After a massive nuclear attack
starvation would afflict some areas, but America's
grain-producing regions still would have an abun-
dance of uncontaminated food. History indicates
that Americans in the food-rich areas would help the
starving. Like the heroic Russians who drove food
trucks to starving Leningrad through bursting Nazi
bombs and shells;' many Americans would risk
radiation and other dangers to bring truckloads of
grain and other necessities to their starving country-
men. Surely, an essential part of psychological
preparations for surviving a modern war is a well-
founded assurance that many citizens of a strong
society will struggle to help each other and will work
together with little regard for danger and loss.Chapter 3
Warnings and Communications
IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE WARNING
When Hiroshima and Nagasaki were blasted by
the first nuclear weapons ever to be used in war, very
few of the tens of thousands of Japanese killed or
injured were inside their numerous air raid shelters.
The single-plane attacks caught them by surprise.
People are not saved by havingshelters nearby unless
they receive warning in time to reach their shelters-
and unless they heed that warning.
TYPES OF WARNINGS
Warnings are of two types, strategicand tactical.
• Strategic warning is based on observed enemy
actions that are believed to be preparations for an
attack. For example, we would have strategic
warning if powerful Russian armies were advancing
into western Europe and Soviet leaders were
threatening massive nuclear destruction if the
resisting nations should begin to use tactical nuclear
weapons. With strategic warning beinggiven by news
broadcasts and newspapers over a period of days,
Americans in areas that are probably targeted would
have time to evacuate. Given a day or more of
warning, tens of millions of uscould build or improve
shelters and in other ways improve our chances of
surviving the feared attack. By doing so, we also
would help decrease the risk of attack.
• Tactical warning of a nuclear attack on the
United States would be received by our highest
officials a few minutes after missiles or other nuclear
weapons had been launched against our country.
Radar, satellites, and other sophisticated means of
detection would begin to feed information into our
military warning systems almost at once. This raw
information would have to be evaluated, ami top-
level·decisions would have to be made. Then attack
warnings would have to be transmitted down to com-
munities all over America.
Tactical warning (attack warning) of an out-of-
the-blue, Pearl-Harbor-type attack would be less
likely to be received by the average American than
would an attack warning given after recognized
strategic warning. However, the short time (only 15to
40 minutes) that would elapse between missile launch-
ings and the resultant first explosions on targets in the
United States would make it difficult for even an
excellent warning system to alert the majority of
Americans in time for them to reach the best available
nearby shelter.
Strengths and weaknesses of the present official
warning system are summarized in the following two
sections. Then the life-saving warnings that the first
nuclear explosions would give, especially to informed
people, are described.
OFFICIAL WARNING SYSTEM
The U.S. official warning system is designed to
givecivilians timely warning by means of siren signals
and radio and television announcements. The National
Warning System (NAWAS) is a wire-line network
which is to provide attack information to official
warning points nationwide. NA WAS is not pro-
tected against electromagnetic pulse (EMP)
effects from nuclear explosions. When the
information is received at warning points by the
officials who are responsible, they will sound local
sirens and initiate radio and TV emergency broad-
casts - if power has not failed. Officials at NAWAS
warning points include many local civil defense
directors. NAWAS receives information from ourconstantly improving military warning and commu-
nications systems.
SIREN WARNINGS
The Attack Warning Signal is a wavering,
wailing sound on the sirens lasting three to five
minutes, or a series of short blasts on whistles or
horns. After a brief pause, it is repeated. This signal
means only one thing: take protective action-go
promptly to the best available shelter. Do not try to
telephone for information; get information from a
radio broadcast after you reach shelter. It is Federal
policy that the Attack Warning Signal will not be
sounded unless an enemy attack on the United States
has been detected. However, since local authorities
may not follow this policy, the reader is advised to
check the plans in his community before a crisis
arrscs.
The following limitations of attack warnings
given by sirens and broadcasting stations should be
recognized:
• Only a relatively small fraction of urban
Americans could hear the sirens in the present city
systems. especially if most urban citizens had
evacuated during a crisis.
• Except in a crisis threatening the outbreak of
nuclear war at any moment. most people who would
hear the attack warning signal either would not
recognize it or would not believe it was a warning of
actual attack.
• A coordinated enemy attack may include the
detonation of a few submarine-launched ballistic
missiles (SLBMs) at high altitudes over the United
States within a few minutes of the launching of
hundreds of SLBMs and intercontinental ballistic
missiles (ICBMs). Such high-altitude bursts would
produceelectromagnetic pulse (EMP)effectsprimarily
intended to knock out or disrupt U.S. military com-
munications. These EMP effects also could knock out
the public power necessary to sound sirens and could
put most unprotected broadcasting stations off the air.
Radio warnings and emergency communications
to thegeneral publicwillbebroadcastbythe Emergency
Broadcast System(EBS). This system uses AM broad-
casting stations as the primary means to reach the
public; selected FM and TV stations are included for
backup. All stations during a crisis plan to use their
normal broadcast frequencies.
EBS stations that are not put off the air by EMP
or other effects of early explosions will attempt to
confirm the siren warnings of a nuclear attack. They
willtry to giveinformation to listeners in the extensive
areas where sirens and whistles cannot be heard.
However, EMP effects on telephones are likely to
limit the information available to the stations. The
functioning EBS stations should be able to warn
listeners to seekthe best available nearbyshelterintime
for most of these listeners to reach such shelter before
ICBMsbeginto explode. Limitations ofthe Emergency
BroadcastingSystem inFebruary 1986 includedthe
fact thatEMPprotectionhadbeencompletedfor
only 125 of the approximately 2,771 radio sta-
tions in the Emergency Broadcast System. One
hundred and ten of 3,000 existing Emergency
Operating Centers also had been protected
againstEMPeffects. Many ofthe protectedstations
would be knocked out by blast; most do not afford
their operating personnel fallout protection that is
adequate for continuing broadcasts for long in areas
subjected to heavy fallout.
WARNINGS GIVEN BY
THE ATTACK ITSELF
The great majority of Americans would not be
injured by the first explosions of a nuclear attack. In
an all-out attack, the early explosions would give
sufficient warning for most people to reach nearby
shelter in time. Fifteen minutes or more before big
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) blasted
our cities, missile sites, and other extensive areas,
most citizens would see the sky lit up to an
astounding brightness, would hear the thunderous
sounds of distant explosions, or would note the
sudden outage of electric power and most communi-
cations. These reliable attack warnings would result
from the explosion of submarine-launched ballistic
missiles (SLBMs). These are smaller than many
ICBMs. The SLBM warheads would explode on
Strategic Air Command bases and on many civilian
airport runways that are long enough to be used by
our big bombers. Some naval bases and high-priority
military command and communication centers
would also be targeted.
The vast majority of Americans do not know
how to use these warnings from explosions to help
them save their lives. Neitherare they informed about
the probable strategies of an enemy nuclear attack.
One of the first objectives of a coordinated
enemy attack would be to destroy our long-range
bombers, because each surviving U.S. bomberwould
be one of our most deadly retaliatory weapons. Once
bombers are airborne and well away from their
runways, they are difficult to destroy. To destroy ourbombers before they could get away, the first SLBMs
would be launched at the same time that ICBMs
would be fired from their silos in Europe and Asia.
L.S. surveillance systems would detect launchings
and transmit warnings within a. very few minutes.
Since some enemy submarines would be only a few
hundred miles from their targets, some SLBMs
would explode on American targets about 15 or 20
minutes before the first ICBMs would hit.
Some SLBMs would strike civilian airport
runways that are at least 7000 ft long. This is the
minimum length required by B-52s; there were 210
such runways in the U.S. in 1977. During a crisis, big
bombers would be dispersed to many of these long
runways. and enemy SLBMs would be likely to target
and hit these runways in an effort to destroy the
maximum number of bombers.
Today most Soviet SLBMs have warheads
between 100 kilotons and one megaton. See
Jane s Weapon Systems, 1987-88. Within 10 to 15
minutes of the beginning of an attack, runways
7000 feet or longer are likely to be hit by
airbursts, to destroy U.S. aircraft and airport
facilities. Later cratering explosions may be
used to destroy surviving long runways, or at
least to produce local fallout soheavy that they
could not beusedfor severaldaysfor re-arming
and re-fueling our bombers. Therefore, homes
within about 4 miles of a runway at least 7000 ft long
are likely to be destroyed before residents receive
warning or have time to reach blast shelters away from
their homes. Homes six miles away could be lightly
damaged bysuch a warhead, with the blast wave from
a l-megaton explosion arriving about 22 seconds
after the warning light. Some windows would be
broken40 milesaway. But the large majority ofcitizens
would not be injured by these early SLBM attacks.
These explosions would be life-saving "take cover"
warningsto most Americans, ifthey have been properly
informed.
Sudden powerand communicationsfailurescaused
by the electromagnetic pulse (EMP) effects of nuclear
explosions also could serve as attack warnings in
extensive areas. An EMP is an intense burst of radio-
frequency radiation generated by a nuclear explosion.
The strong, quick-rising surges of electric current
induced by EMP in power transmission lines and long
antennas could burn out most unprotected electrical
and electronic equipment. Alsolikelytobedamaged
or destroyed would be unprotected computers.
The solid state electrical components of some
aircraft and of some motors of modern autos,
trucks, and tractors may be put out of commis-
sion. Metalbodiesgivesomeprotection, whereas
plastic bodies give little.
The usual means of protectingelectrical equipment
against surges of current produced by lightning are
generally ineffective against EM P. The protective
measures are known, but to date all too few civilian
installations have been protected against EMP effects.
Three or four nuclear weapons skillfully spaced and
detonated at high altitudes over the United States
would produce EMPeffects that might knock out most
public power, most radioand TV broadcastingstations
lacking special protection against these effects, and
most radios connected to long antennas. Nuclear
explosions on or near the ground may produce dam-
aging EMP effects over areas somewhat larger than
those in which such equipmentand buildings would be
damaged by the blast effects.
HOW TO RESPOND TO UNEXPECTED
ATTACK WARNINGS
Although a Pearl-Harbor-type of attack is
unlikely; citizens should be prepared to respond
effectively to unexpected warnings.
These warnings include:
• Extremely bright lights-more light than has
been seen before. The dazzling. bright lights of the
first SLBM explosions on targets in many parts of the
United States would beseen by most Americans. One
should not look to determine the source of light and
heat, because there is danger of the viewer's eyes
being damaged by the heat and light from a large
explosion at distances as far as a hundred miles away,
in clear weather. Look down and away from the
probable source, and quickly get behind anything
that will shield you from most of the thermal pulse's
burning heat and intense light. A thermal pulse
delivers its heat and light for several seconds-for
more than II seconds ifit isfrom a I-megaton surface
burst and for approximately 44 seconds if from a 20-
megaton surface burst.
If you are at home when you see the amazingly
bright light, run out of rooms with windows. Hurry
to a windowless hallway or down into the basement.
If you have a shelterclose to your house, but separate
from it, do not leave the best cover in your home to
run outdoors to reach the shelter; wait until about
two minutes after first seeing the light.
If outdoors when you see the bright light, get
behind the best available cover.
It would be impossible to estimate the distance
to an explosion from its light or appearance, so you
should stay under cover for about two minutes. A
blast wave initially travels much faster than the
normal speed of sound (about 1 mile in 5 seconds).
But by the time its overpressure has decreased to I
pound per square inch (psi), a blast wave and its
thunderous sound have slowed down and are moving
only about 3C/c faster than the normal speed of sound.If no blast or sound reaches you in two minutes,
you would know that the explosion was over 25miles
away and you would not be hurt by blast effects,
unless cut by shattered window glass. After two
minutes you can safely leave the best cover in your
home and get a radio. Turn the dial to the stations to
which you normally listen and try to find informa-
tion. Meanwhile, quickly make preparations to go to
the best shelter you and your family can reach within
15 minutes-the probable time interval before the
first ICBMs start to explode.
At no time after an attack begins should you
look out of a window or stay near a window. Under
certain atmospheric conditions, windows can be
shattered by a multimegaton explosion a hundred
miles away.
• The sound of explosions. The thunderous
booms of the initial SLBM explosions would be
heard over almost all parts of the United States.
Persons one hundred miles away from a nuclear
explosion may receive their first warning by hearing
it about 71 2 minutes later. Most would have time to
reach nearby shelter before the ICBMs begin to
explode.
• Loss of electric power and communications. If
the lights go out and you find that many radio and TV
stations are suddenly off the air, continue to dial if
you have a battery-powered radio, and try to find a
station that is still broadcasting.
HOW TO RESPOND TO ATTACK WARNINGS
DURING A WORSENING CRISIS
Ifan attack takes place duringa worseningcrisis,
the effectiveness of warnings would be greater. Even
if ovr government did not order an evacuation of
high-risk areas, millions of Americans would already
have moved to safer areas if they had learned that the
enemy's urban civilians were evacuating or that
tactical nuclear weapons were being employed over-
seas. Many prudent citizens would sleep inside the
best available shelter and stay in or near shelter most
of their waking hours. Many people would have
made or improved family or small-groupsheltersand
would have supplied them with most essentials. The
official warning systems would have been fully
alerted and improved.
During such a tense crisis period, neighbors
or people sheltered near each other should have
someone listen to radio stations at all times of the
day and night. Ifthe situation worsened or an attack
warning were broadcast, the listener could alert the
others.
One disadvantage of waiting to build expedient
shelters until there is a crisis is that many of the
builders are likely to be outdoors improving their
shelters when the first SLBMs are launched. The
SLBM warheads may arrive so soon that the civilian
warning systems cannot respond in time. To reduce
the risk of being burned, persons working outdoors
when expecting an attack should wear shirts, hats,
and gloves. They shouldjump into a shelteror behind
a nearby shielding object at the first warning, which
may be the sudden cut-off of some radio
broadcasts.
REMAINING INSIDE SHELTER
Curiosity and ignorance probably will cause
many people to come out of sheltersa fewhours after
an attack warning, if no blast or obvious fallout has
endangered their area. This is dangerous, because
several hours after almost all missiles have been
launched the first enemy bombers may strike. Cities
and other targets that have been spared because
missiles malfunctioned or missed are likely to be
destroyed by nuclear bombs dropped during the first
several days after the first attack.
Most people should stay inside their shelters for
at least two or three days, even ifthey are in a locality
far from a probable target and even if fallout meter
readings prove there is no dangerous fallout.·
Exceptions would include some of the people who
would need to improve shelters or move to better
shelters. Such persons could do so at relatively small
risk duringthe interval between the ICBM explosions
and the arrival of enemy bombers and/or the start of
fallout deposition a few hours later.
Fallout would cover most of the United States
within 12 hours after a massive attack. People could
rarely depend on information received from distant
radio stations regarding changing fallout dangers and
advising when and for how long they could go outside
their shelters. Weather conditions such as wind speed
would cause fallout dangers to vary with distance. If
not forced by thirst or hunger to leave shelter, they
should depend on thei.rown fallout meter readings or
on radiation measurements made by neighbors or local
civildefense workers.HOW TO KEEP RADIOS OPERATING
Having a radio to receive emergency broadcasts
would be a great advantage. The stations that would
still be on the air after an attack would probably be
too distant from most survivors to give them reliable
information concerning local, constantly changing
fallout dangers. However, both morale and the
prospects of long-range survival would be improved
in shelters with a radio bringing word of the large-
area fallout situation, food-relief measures, practical
survival skills, and what the government and other
organizations were doing to help. Radiocontact with
the outside world probably can be maintained after
an attack if you remember to:
• Bring all of your family's battery-powered,
portable radios with you to shelter, along with all
fresh batteries on hand.
• Protect AM radios by using only their built-in
short loop antennas. The built-in antennas of small
portable radios are too short for EMP to induce
damaging surges of current in them.
• Keep antennas of FM, CB, and amateur radios
as short as practical, preferably less than 10 inches.
When threatened by EMP, a danger that may con-
tinue for weeks after the initial attack because of
repeated, high-altitude explosions, do not add a wire
antenna or connect a short radio antenna to a pipe.
Remember that a surge of current resulting from
EMP especially can damage diodes and transistors,
thus ending a radio's usefulness or reducing its range
of reception.
• Keep all unshielded radios at least six feet away
from any long piece of metal, such as pipes, metal
ducts, or wires found in many basements and other
shelters. Long metal conductors can pick up and
carry large EMP surges, causing induced current
to surge in nearby radios and damage them.
• Shield each radio against EMP when not in use
by completely surrounding it with conducting metal
ifit is kept within six feet ofa long conductorthrough
which powerful currents produced by EMP might
surge. A radio may be shielded against EMP by
placing it inside a metal cake box or metal storage
can, or by completely surrounding it with aluminum
foil or metallic window screen.
• Disconnect the antenna cable of your car radio
at the receiver-or at least ground the antenna when
not in use by connecting it with a wire to the car
frame. Use tape or clothespins to assure good metal-
to-metal contact. The metal of an outside mirror is
a convenient grounding-point. Park your car as near
to your shelter as practical, so that after fallout
has decayed sufficiently you may be able to use
the car radio to get distant stations that are still
broadcasting.
• Prevent possible damage to a radio from ex-
treme dampness (which may result from long
occupancy of some belowground shelters) by keep-
ing it sealed in a clear plastic bag large enough so
the radio can be operated while inside. An additional
precaution is to keep a plastic-covered radio in an
air-tight. container with some anhydrite made from
wallboard gypsum, as described in Appendix C.
• Conserve batteries, because after an attack you
may not be able to get replacements for months.
Listen only periodically, to the stations you find give
the most useful information. The batteries of
transistor radios will last up to twice as long if the
radios are played at reduced volume.Chapter 4
Evacuation
CHANGED EVACUATION REQUIREMENTS
The most threatening Soviet nuclear war-
heads in the mid-1970s were multi-megaton,
such as single warheads of approximately 20
megatons carried by each of over 250 SS-18s.
About half of these huge Russian warheads
would have hit within a quarterof a mile orless
of their intended targets - close enough to
destroy a missile in its hardened silo. Today's
improved Russian warheadshave a 50-50 proba-
bility of hittingwithin a few hundredfeetof their
aiming points. With such accuracy, multi-
megaton warheads are not needed to destroy
very hard targets, especially missiles in their
blast-protective silos.
Soviet strategy continues to stress the de-
struction of military targets, in order to mini-
mize Russian losses from retaliatory strikes.
This logical, long-establishedSovietstrategy is
emphasized in numerous authoritative Russian
books, including the three editions of Soviet
Military Strategy, by Marshall ofthe Soviet Union
V. D: Sokolovskiy.
One result of this logical strategy has been
the replacement of huge Soviet warheads by
numerous, much smaller, much more accurate
warheads. In 1990 almost all large missiles
have several Multiple Independently-targetted
Reentry Vehicles (MIRVed) warheads. Soviet
warheads - especially the 10 warheads of
500 kilotons each carried by most SS-18s -
could destroy almost all important U.S. fixed
military installations, and also almost all U.S.
commandandcontrolfacilities, airportrunways
longer than 7,000 feet, major seaports, and the
factories and refineries that are the basis of our
military power. (Although an all-out Soviet
attack could destroy almost all missile silos
and missiles in them, a first-strike attack is
deterred in partbythe possibilitythat mostU.S.
missiles in silos would be launched on warning
and would be in space, on their trajectories
toward Russian targets, beforeSovietwarheads
could reach their silos.)
How should your plans either to evacuate
during a worsening crisis, or to remain in your
home area, be influenced by the dramatic
changes inthe Soviet nuclear arsenal? Some of
these changes are indicated by Fig. 4.1, that
incorporates information on the dimensions of
the stabilized clouds of one megaton and 200
,kiloton explosions, from reference 6, The Effects
ofNuclear Weapons, 1977,and similarinformation
on a 20-megaton cloud derived from a graph on
page 20 of The Effects on the Atmosphere ofa Major
Nuclear Exchange, by the Committee on the At-
mospheric Effects of Nuclear Explosions, Na-
tional Research Council, National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C. 1985. (This NRC graph
is based on Ballistic Missile Organization 83-5
Part 1, datedzs September 1983, a report that is
not generally available.)
The air bursting of one of the probably few
20-megaton warheads carried by Soviet ICBMs
would destroy typical American homes up to
about 16milesfrom groundzero. Incontrast, the
air bursting of an approximately t-megaton
warhead - one ofthe large warheads in today's
Soviet arsenal - would destroy most homes
within a roughly circular area having a radius
of "only" about 5 miles. So, if you take into
consideration the advantages to Soviets of
arming their largest ICBMs with several very
accurate smaller warheads, each capable of
destroying a militarily important target, you
may logically conclude that unless your home
is closerthan 10miles from the nearestprobable
target, you need not evacuate to avoid blast and
fire dangers.
Your planning to avoid incapacitating or
fatal exposure to fallout radiation will involve
more uncertaintiesthan will yourplansto avoid
blast and fire dangers. The high altitude winds
that carry fallout farthest before deposition
usually blow from west to east. Therefore, in
most areas your chances of avoiding extreme-
ly dangerous radiation dangers are improved if28
120-
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
IS
14
13
12
II
10
AVERAGE 9HEIGHT OF BOTTOM
OF STRATOSPHERE__ 8
'"TROPOSPHERE 7 w...J
6 ~
5 ~
4 t-
I
3 <!l
2 w
I
0
)
ONE MEGATON
RADIUS =5.1
MILES
TWENTY MEGATONS
RADIUS OF STABILIZED CLOUD = 20 MILES
\5.5 MILES)
165 MILES= DISTANCE FROM GZ TO WHERE)
IWOOD- FRAME HOUSES ARE ONLY
COLLAPSED
Fig. 4.1. Stabilized radioactive fallout clouds shown a few minutes after air-burst
explosions, with distances from Ground Zeros at which the wood frames of typical
homes are almostcompletelycollapsed. The cloudsfrom surface ornear-surface bursts
are almost as large, but the distances of blast damage are reduced by around 38 percent.
100
!W
dO
TO
t-
W
W COu,
u.
0
(f) 50
0
2
<t
(J)
40:::>
0It-
30
~
t-
I 20
'"W
I 10
0
you evacuate westward to an area away from
likely nearby targets. However, since no one
can foretell with certainty in what directions
future winds will blow, your plans to remain
where you live, or your crisis evacuation plans
should include building, improving, orutilizing
high-protection-factor shelter, as explained in
following chapters.
If you live near a target the destruction of
which has high priority in Soviet war-winning
strategy, then a decade or so ago it quite likely
was targetted by a 20-MT warhead. Fig. 4.1
shows the awesome size ofthe stabilized radio-
active cloud from a 20-MT air burst. This cloud
wouldexpand in minutes to this huge size in the
thin air of the stratosphere, would contain only
extremely small particles almost all of which
would remain airborne for weeks to years, and
would result in no fallout deposition that would
promptly incapacitate exposed people.
A 20-MT surfaceburst ornear-surface burst
would produce a stabilized radioactive cloud
extending almost as far in all directions from
GZ as would a 20-MT air burst. Its tremendous
fireball would "suck up" millions of tons of
pulverized rock and would contaminate those
particles with its radioactive material. Fallout
particles as big as marbles" would fall from the
stabilized cloud to the ground in minutes. Very
heavy fallout could be deposited as far as 18
miles upwind from such a 20-MT explosion,
with heavyfallout, capable ofcausingfatalities
within days to weeks, extending downwind for
several hundred miles.
A l-MTsurfaceburst,Fig. 4.1,wouldproduce
a stabilized fallout cloud unlikely to result in
fallout being deposited in the upwind or cross-
wind directions from GZ beyondthe rangeofthe
explosion's home-destroying blast effects.
Clearly, the risk of your being endangered by
very heavy fallout if you remain 6 miles from
GZ of a 1-MT surface burst, and happen to be
upwind or crosswind from GZ, is less than the
risk you would have run a decade ago ifyou had
stayed 18 miles upwind or crosswind from the
same target, which had been destroyed by a 20-
MT surface or near-surface burst.HIGHEST-RISK AND HIGH-RISK AREAS
Highest-riskareas are thosein which build-
ings are likely to be destroyed by blast and/or
fire, and/or where a person in the open for the
first two weeks after fallout deposition would
receive a total radiation dose of 10,000 R or
more. The largest highest-risk areas would be
those within our five Minuteman missile fields,
within a few miles all around them, and for up to
about 150 miles downwind. Thesehuge highest-
risk areas are indicated by five of the largest
black fallout patterns on Fig. 4.2.
Fig. 4.2 is an oudated, computer-drawn
fallout map based on a multi-megaton attack
considered credible 10 years ago. (An updated,
unclassified fallout map of the United States,
showingradiationdoses to persons in the open,
is not available.) This outdated attack included
113 surfaceburstsof20 megatons each on urban
and industrial targets, an unlikely assumption
similar to those used in making some official
civil defense risk-area maps that assumed sur-
face burstson all targets nationwide. Employing
all surface bursts makes little sense to the
military, because air burstingthe sameweapons
would destroy most military installations, as
well as factories and other urban and industrial
assets, over approximately twice as large an
area.
As will be explained later, to survive in such
areas people would have to stay inside very good
shelters for several weeks, or, after two weeks or more,
leave very good shelters and drive in a few hours to an
area relatively free of fallout dangers. A "very good"
fallout shelter is one that reduces the radiation dose
received by its occupants to less than 1/200th of the
dose they would have received outdoors during the
same period. If the two-week dose outdoors were
20,000 R, such a shelter with a protection factor of 200
(PF200)would prevent each occupant from receiving a
dose greater than 100 R - not enough to incapacitate.
Even a completely belowground home basement,
unless greatly improved as described in Chapter 5.
would give entirely inadequate protection.
High-risk fallout areas are those where the two-
week dose outdoors is between 5,000 and 10,000 R. In
such areas. good fallout shelters would be essential.
supplied at least with adequate waterand baby food for
two weeks. Furthermore. survivors would have to
remain inside shelters for most of each day for several
additional weeks.
The radiation dangers in the shaded areas of the
map are shown decreasing as the distances from the
explosions increase. This generally isthe case, although
sometimes rain or snow carries radioactive particles to
the ground. producing "rainouts" of exceptionally
heavv fallout farther downwind. Furthermore, this
computer-drawn map made at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory does not indicate the very dangerous
29
fallout near the isolated surface bursts. Although the
most dangerous fallout would be carried by high-
altitude winds that usually blow from westto east, such
simplified fallout patterns as those shown should be
used only as rough guides to help improve chances of
evacuating a probable blast area or very heavy fallout
area and going to a less dangerous area. Wind
directions are undependable; an enemy's targeting can
be unexpected; weapons can miss. A prudent citizen.
no matter where he is,should try to build a shelter that
gives excellent protection against fallout radiation.
A major disadvantage of all types of risk-area
maps is the fact that poorly informed people often
misinterpret them and conclude that ifthey are outside
a mapped risk area, they are relatively safe from blast,
fire, and even deadly fallout dangers.
Another reason for not placing much re-
liance on risk-area maps like Fig. 4.2 is that
such unclassified maps available in 1986 are
based onthe largestattacks consideredpossible
a decade ago. In 1986the sizesofSovietwarheads
are much smaller, their numbers are much
larger, and their total megatonage and capa-
bility to produce fallout remain about the same
as 10 years ago.
The outdated attack scenario used in pro-
ducing Fig. 4.2 also involved the surface burst-
ing of multi-megaton warheads totaling 3,190
megatons on military targets, including over
2,000 megatons logically surfacebursted on our
five Minuteman missile fields. Such an attack
on our missile fields would produce about the
same amount of fallout as is shown in Fig. 4.2.
Today, however, heavy fallout from ourmissile
fields would extend somewhatshorterdistances
downwind, because of the lower heights of the
stabilized radioactive clouds from one-megaton
and smaller surface and near-surface bursts, as
compared to those of multi-megaton warheads
that would have been exploded 10 years ago, at a
time when a 20-megaton warhead was typical of
the Soviet nuclear ICBM arsenal.
In 1986 hundreds of targets besides those
indicated in Fig. 4.2 might be hit, but the total
area ofthe United States subjectedto lethal fall-
out probably would be lessthan is shown in Fig.
4.2. To maximize areas of destruction by blast
and fire, mosttargets in urban and/or industrial
areas would be attacked with air bursts, which
would produce little or no promptly lethal or
incapacitatingfallout - exceptperhaps in scat-
tered "hot spots" where rain-outs or snow-outs
could bring huge numbers of tiny, very radio-
active particles to earth within hours after the
air burstingoftoday'skiloton-range Sovietwar-
heads. And since most Americans live far away
from "hard" targets - especially far from mis-
sile silos. downwind from which extremely
heavy fallout is likely - most of us living in or
near high-risk areas probably would be en-
dangered primarilybyblastandfire, notfallout.
in the event of a Soviet attack.DO-IOOR
• > 20,000
/40°/_
/
30°
50°,_
I
/
·101-450 R
J_2~0
liz;451- 2500 R 112501 - 5000 R III5001- 10,000 R
70°
80°
~ , ..,....- -'
ORNL-DWG 78-20305R
.10,004 - 20,000 R
Fig. 4.2. Simplified,outdatedfallout patternsshowingtotal radiationdoses thatwould be receivedby persons
on the surface and in the open for the entire 14days following the surface bursting of 5050megatons on the targets
indicated, if the winds at all elevations blew continuously from the west at 25 mph.WHETHER TOEVACUATE
Let's assumethatRussiancitieswerebeing
evacuated, or that tactical nuclear weapons
were beginning to be used in what had been an
overseasconventionalwarinvolvingthe United
States. In such a worseningcrisis, mostAmeri-
cans could improve their survival chances by
getting out of the highest-risk and high-risk
areas.
U.S. capabilities for war-crisis evacuation
are poor and tending to worsen. Several years
ago, out of the approximately 3,100 evacuation
plans required nationwide, about 1,500had been
made, andthese involvedonly aboutonethirdof
Americans living in risk areas. By 1986 some
cities and states had abandonedtheirwar-crisis
evacuation plans; most still have plans that
would save millions if ordered in time during a
crisis lasting at least a few days and completed
beforetheattack. Who wouldorderanevacuation
under threat of attack, and under what circum-
stances, remainunansweredquestions. Further-
more, compulsory evacuation during a war
crisis was not and is not part of any official
American evacuation plan. So, if you believe
that a nuclear attack on the United States is
possible and want to improve your chances of
surviving, then well before a desperate crisis
arises you had better either make preparations
to improve your and your family's survival
chances at or near where you live, or plan and
prepare to evacuate.
Spontaneous evacuations, in which Ameri-
cans would make their own decisions without
the authorities havingrecommended anymove-
ment, probably wouldoccurduringa worsening
warcrisis. Trafficjamsand othercomplications
are less likely to occur if citizens start leaving
high-risk areas on their own, over a period of
several hours to a few days, rather than if
almost everyone, on receiving recommenda-
tions from officials, at once begins a poorly
controlledevacuation. (Spontaneousevacuation
by Gulf Coast residents, begun under threat of
an approaching hurricane, have lessened sub-
sequent traffic problems in the evacuations
ordered or recommended by officials several
hours later.)
Exceptinareaswherethelocalcivildefense
war-crisisevacuationplansarewelldeveloped,
most Americans living farther than 10 miles
from the nearest probable separate target prob-
ablycanbestimprovetheirchancesof surviving
a nuclear attack by preparing to remain at or
near their homes and there to make or improve
good shelters. Exceptions include those living
in the vicinity of targets of great military
importance to the Soviets - especially our
missile fields, on which many warheads would
be surface or near-surface bursted, producing
extremely heavy fallout for up to 150 miles
downwind. Americans living in these greatly
endangered areas would do well to make their
plans in keeping with the local official civil
defense evacuation plans, at least regarding
directions and distances to localities not likely
to be endangered by heavy fallout.
Nuclear submarine ports, Strategic Air
Command bases, and Air Force installations
with long runways also would be destroyed by
even a limitedSovietcounterforceordisarming
attack. These prime strategic assets are likely
to be blasted by Submarine Launched Ballistic
Missiles (SLBMs) inthefirst 15or20 minutes of
the war. SLBM warheads are not as accurate as
ICBM warheads, and air bursts can destroy
bombers and submarines in port over about
twice as large areas as if these same weapons
are exploded at or near the surface. Therefore,
SLBM warheads probably would be air bursted
on these prime "soft" targets, with little or no
local fallout. (In an all-out Soviet attack, hours
later long runways are likely to be cratered by
accurate ICBM warheads and by bombs, to
make sure our returning bombers could not use
them.)
On the following page are listed considera-
tions, favorable andunfavorable,toevacuation.
These comparativelistsmayhelpyou andyour
family make a more logical decision regarding
evacuation:Favorable to Evacuation:
* You live In a highest-risk or high-risk
area.
* You have transportation (this means a car
and enough gasoline), and roads are open to a
considerably lower-risk area.
* You are in fairly good health or can
evacuate with someone capable of taking care of
you.
* Your work is not of the kind that your
community depends on (such as a policeman, fire-
man, or telephone operator).
* You have some tools with which to build or im-
prove a fallout shelter. You also have water con-
tainers, food, clothing, etc., adequate for lifein the
area to which you would go.
Instructions for building expedient fallout and
blast shelters and for making expedient life-support
equipment are given in following chapters. The
reader is advised to study all of this book carefully
before making up his mind regarding basic survival
action.
THE NEED FOR AN
EVACUATION CHECKLIST
A good flyer, no matter how many years he has
flown. runs through a checklist covering his plane
before taking off. Similarly, acitizen preparing under
crisis pressures to do something he has never done
before~evacuate-should use a checklist to be sure
that he takes with him the most useful of hisavailable
possessions.
Unfavorable to Evacuation:
* You live outside a highest-risk or high-risk
area and could build an expedient fallout shelter
and make other survival preparations where you
live.
* You have no means of transportation or
you believe that roads are likely to be blocked
by the time you make your decision.
* You are sick, decrepit, or lack the will to try
to survive if things get tough.
* You cannot suddenly leave your home area
for several days without hurting others.
* You lack the tools, etc., that would be
helpful-i-but not necessarily essential-to success-
ful evacuation.
A family planning to use an expedient shelter or
basement.at or near home also should use the
Evacuation Checklist on the following page to make
sure needed survival items are not overlooked.
The family of six pictured in Fig. 4.3 used the
Evacuation Checklist given below to select the most
useful things that could be carried in and on their
small car. They assembled categories of items in
separate piles, then selected some items to take with
them from each pile. They were able to leave their
home 76 minutes after receiving the Evacuation
Checklist. (Following chapters of this book include
descriptions of this family's success in evacuating,
building a Pole-CoveredTrench Shelter, and living in
it continuously for 77 hours.)EVACUAnON CHECKLIST
Includes items for building or improving shelters)
Loading Procedure: Make separate piles for
ach category (except categories I and 5). Then load
ne car with some items from each category, taking
s much as can be safely carried and being careful
J leave room for all passengers.
\. THE MOST NEEDED ITEMS
Category I. Survival Information: Shelter-
buildingand other nuclear survival
instructions, maps, all available
small battery-powered radios and
extra batteries, a fallout metersuch
as a homemade KFM (see Appen-
dix C), and writing materials.
Category 2. Tools: Shovel, pick, saw (a bow-
saw is best), ax or hatchet, file,
knife, pliers, and any other tools
specified in the building instruc-
tions for the shelter planned. Also
take work gloves.
Category 3. Shelter-Building Materials: Rain-
proofing materials (plastic, shower
curtains, cloth, etc.) as specified in
the instructions for the type of
shelter planned. Also, unless the
weather is very cold, a homemade
shelter-ventilating pump such as a
KAP, or the materials to build one
(see Appendix B).
Category 4. Water: Small, filled containers plus
all available large polyethylene trash
bags, smaller plastic bags and pillow
cases, water-purifying material such
as Clorox, and a teaspoon for
measuring.
Category 5. Peacetime valuables: Money, credit
cards, negotiablesecurities, valuable
jewelry, checkbooks, and the most
important documents kept at home.
(Evacuation may be followea
not by nuclear war, but by con-
tinuingunstablenuclearpeace.)
Category 6. Light: Flashlights, candles, mate-
rials to improvise cooking-oil lamps
(2 clear glass jars of about l-pint
size, cooking oil, cotton string for
wicks(seeChapter II, Light), kitchen
matches, and a moisture-proof jar
for storing matches.
Category 7. Clothing: Cold-weatherboots, over-
shoes, and warm outdoor cloth-
ing (even in summer, since after
an attack these would be unobtain-
able), raincoats and ponchos. Wear
work clothes and work shoes.
Category 8. Sleeping Gear: A compact sleeping
bag or two blankets per person.
Category 9. Food: Food for babies (including
milk powder, cooking oil, and
sugar) has the highest priority.
Compact foods that require no
cooking are preferred. Include at
least one pound of salt, available
vitamins, a can and bottle opener,
a knife, and 2 cooking pots with
lids (4-qt size preferred). For each
person:onecup, bowl,andlarge
spoon. Also, a bucket stove, or
minimum materials for making a
bucketstove:ametalbucket,10al\-
wire coat hangers, a nail, and a cold
chisel orscrewdriver(seeChapter9,
. Food).
Category 10. Sanitation Items: Plastic film or
plastic bags in which to collect and
contain excrement; a bucket or
. plastic container for urine; toilet
paper, tampons, diapers, and soap.
Category 11. Medical Items: Aspirin, a first-aid
kit, all available antibiotics and
disinfectants, special prescription
medicines (if essential to a member
of the family), potassium iodide (for
protection against radioactive io-
dine, see Chapter 13), spare eye-
glasses, and contact lenses.
Category 12. Miscellaneous: Two square yards
of mosquito netting or insect screen
with which to screen the shelter
openings if insects are a problem,
insect repellents, a favorite book or
two.
B. SOME USEFUL ITEMS (To take ifcar space is
available):
1. Additional tools.
2. A tent, a small camp stove, and some
additional kitchen utensils.Fig. 4.3. Six members of a Utah family arriving at a rural shelter-building site 64 miles from their
urban home.
EVACUATING BY CAR
The small car shown in Fig. 4.3 was skillfully
loaded for a safe evacuation trip. To make room for
supplies, the back seat was left at home. The load
on top of the car included blankets, a small rug, and
a small tent-all made of springy materials which
kept the load from becomingcompacted and working
loose under the 114-inch nylon ropes tightened
around it.The two loop-ended ropes went over the load
and around the top of the car, passing over the tops of
the closed doors.
USING MUSCLE POWER
Hazards of evacuation would include highways
blocked by wrecks and stalled vehicles. Ifleadership
and know-how were provided, the muscle power
of people usually could quickly clear a highway.
During a major Chineseevacuation before advancing
Japanese armies in World War II, I observed
Chinese, using only muscle power, quickly clear
a mountain road of wrecks and other obstructions.
Americans can do the same, if someone convinces
them that they can do it, as proved by a wintertime
episode on Monarch Pass over the Continental
Divide in Colorado. At least 100 vehicles were held
up after a large wrecking truck overturned on the
icy highway. The patrolmen were doing nothinguntil
I told them how the Chinese handled sucha situation.
The patrolmen then called for volunteers from
among the delayed motorists to lift the overturned
truck back onto its wheels. In less than 15minutes,
about 50 people had combined their muscle power
and opened Monarch Pass to traffic.
Citizens should take direct action to keep traffic
moving during a crisis evacuation.
MAKING AN EXPEDIENT OR
PERMANENT SHELTER INSTEAD OF
EVACUATING
Millions of Americans have homes within very
largeurban-industrialareas, probablynotallof which
would be subjected to blast and fire dangers.
Many, whose homes are in the suburbs or ad-
jacenttowns in these metropolitan areas, couldlogically decide not to evacuate, but to build earth-
covered shelters at or very near their homes and to
supply them with life-support essentials. Likewise,
people living even as close as 5 miles from an
isolated probable target may decide to build a
good shelter near their supplies, rather than to
evacuate. This is a good idea, provided that (I) their
homes are far enough away from probable aiming
points to make such shelters practical, and (2)enough
time, space, tools, materials, and supplies are available.
The photo (Fig. 4.4)shows a family with no adult
male that built an expedient shelter that would givefar
betterfallout, blast, and fireprotectionthanalmostany
home. They succeeded, despite the necessityofworking
on cold November-days withsnow flurries. The top two
inches ofearth werefrozen and the next two feetsodry
that most of it had to be loosened with their dull pick.
No memberofthis family had done any serious digging
before, yet they built a shelter that would have given
about 100 times as much protection against fallout
radiation as would a typical small frame house and at
least 25 times as much as atypical home basement.
(Falloutsheltersare designedfor protectionagainst
radiation from fallout particles. Although fallout shel-
ters lack blast doors and other means for keeping out
blast, the better types would prevent their occupants
from being killed by blast effects in extensive areas
where people in houses would have little chance of
surviving. Inthis book,an "expedientshelter"generally
means an expedient fallout shelter.)
Even as simple an earth-covered fallout
shelter as this Door-Covered Trench Shelter, if
built well separatedfrom flammable buildings,
usually would save its occupants' lives in ex-
tensive areas devastated by blast and/or fire.
The area of probable survival in a good earth-
coveredfallout shelterwouldextendfrom where
blastdamage wouldbe lightbutfires likelyto be
numerous, inward toward GZ to where most
homes would be collapsed by blast and/or de-
stroyed by fire. This ring-shaped area of prob-
able survival from blast and/or fire effects of a
1-MT air burst would extend from about 8 miles
from GZ inward to approximately 5.5 miles. Its
area would be about 105 square miles, more
than the 95 square miles in the circular area
with a radius of 5.5 miles centered on GZ and
within which this simple a shelter probably
would be collapsed by the blastoverpressure of
a 1-MT airburst.(Door-CoveredTrenchShelters
and most of the other types of earth-covered
expedient shelters described in this book have
Fig. 4.4. This family completed their Pro-
tection Factor 200 (PF 200) fallout shelter, a
Door-Covered Trench Shelter with 2 feet of
earth on its roof, 34 hours after receiving the
building instructions at their home.
been proven dependable in test explosions con-
ducted by the Defense Nuclear Agency.)
In many areas, this and even better types of
expedient fallout shelters affording considerable blast
protectioncould bebuilt by untrained families, follow-
ing the written, field-tested instructions in this book.
Furthermore (as shown in Appendix 0, Expedient
Blast Shelters) within a fewdays a small but significant
fraction of the population could build expedient blast
shelters complete with expedient blast doors and
providing at least 15-psiblast protection,Chapter 5
Shelter, the Greatest Need
ADEQUATE SHELTER
To improve your chances ofsurviving a nuclear
attack, your primary need would be an adequate
shelter equipped for many days of occupancy. A
shelter that affords good protection against fallout
radiation and weather would be adequate in more
than 95% of the area of the United States. However,
even in almost all areas not endangered by blast and
fire during a massive nuclear attack, the fallout
protection provided by mostexisting buildings would
not be adequate if the winds blew from the wrong
direction during the time of fallout deposition.
To remain in or near cities or other probable
target areas, one would need betterprotection against
blast, fire, and fallout than is provided by most
shelters in buildings. Blast tests have proved that the
earth-covered expedient fallout shelters described in
this book can survive blast effects severe enough to
demolish most homes.'
This chapter is concerned primarily with
expedient shelters that give excellent protection
against fallout radiation. These earth-covered fallout
shelters could be built in 48 hours or less by tens of
millions of Americans following field-tested, written
instructions." Expedient blast shelters are discussed
in Appendix D. The special blast doors and other
design features needed for effective blast protection
require more work, materials, and skill than are
needed for expedient fallout shelters.
If average Americans are to do their best when
building expedient shelters and life-support equip-
ment for themselves, they need detailed information
about what to do and about why it is to their
advantage to do it. We are not a people accustomed
to blindly following orders. Unfortunately, during a
crisis threatening nuclear war, it would take too long
to read instructions explaining why each important
feature was designed as specified. Therefore, only a
few reasons are included in the step-by-step,
illustrated instructions given in Appendix A for
building 6 types of earth-covered expedient shelters
during a crisis.
In this chapter, reasons will be given for design-
ing a Pole-Covered Trench Shelteras specified in the
Oak Ridge National Laboratory instructions given
in Appendix A.2. The two pages of drawings and
plans given at the end ofAppendix A.2 show the parts
of this' shelter, except for the essential shelter-
ventilating pump installed in its entrance trench. The
following account of how an urban family, after
evacuating, used these instructions to build such a
shelter in less than 36 hours also includes
explanations of various radiation dangers and of
simple means to build protection against these
dangers.
This family, like scores of other families
recruited to build shelters or life-support equipment,
was offered a sum aboutequivalent to laborers'wages
if its members completed the experiment within a
specified time. The test period began the moment the
family received the written, illustrated instructions
preparatory to evacuating by car, as mentioned in the
preceding chapter. Like the other test families, this
family was paid for all ofits materials used. Ifa family
worked hard and completed the project in half the
specified time, it was paid a cash bonus. Throughout
such tests workers were guided only by the written
instructions, which were improved after each
successive test.The successful outcome of almost all the shelter-
buildingexperiments indicatesthattens of millions of
Americans in a nuclear war crisis would work hard
and successfully to build earth-covered expedient
shelters that would give them better protection
against fallout, blast, and fire than would all but a
very small fraction of existing buildings. However,
this beliefisdependent on two conditions: (I) that ina
desperate, worsening crisis our country's highest
officials would supply strong, motivating leadership;
and (2) that Americans would have received-well in
advance-shelter-building and otherpractical, tested
survival instructions.
SHELTER AGAINST RADIAnON
The family previously pictured evacuatingbycar
(Fig. 4.3) drove 64 miles to build a shelter at the site
shown in Fig. 5.1. Although the August sun was very
hot in this irrigated Utah valley, the family members
did not build in the shade of nearby trees. To avoid
digging through roots, they carried the poles about
150 feet and dug their trench near the edge of the
cornfield.
The father and the oldest son did most of the
work of making the shelter. The mother and second
son had health problems; the two youngest children
were not accustomed to work.
The family followed an earlier version of the
plans and instructions given in Appendix A for
building a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. Because the
earth was firm and stable, the trenches were dugwith
vertical walls. If the earth had been less stable, it
would have been necessary to slope the walls-
increasing the width at the top of the main trench
from 3\/2 to 5 feet.
Before placing the roof poles, the workers
assured themselves a more comfortable shelter by
covering the trench walls. They had brought a large
number of the plastic garbage bags required in their
home community and split some bags open to make
wall coverings. Bed sheets or other cloth could have
been used.
The room of this 6-person shelter was 31/2 feet
wide, 41/2 feet high, and 161/2 feet long. A small stand-
up hole was dug at one end, so each tall occupant
could stand up and stretch several times a day.
The trenches for entry and emergency exit were
dug only 22 inches wide, to minimize radiation
entering the shelter through these openings. One wall
of these two narrow trenches was an extension of the
Fig. 5.1. Placing 9-foot poles for the roof of a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter.room wall shown on the right in Fig. 5.1. The family
sat and slept along the left wall, to be better shielded
from radiation coming through the openings.
This shelter was designed so that its main trench
could be enlarged to make a much more livable room
without disturbing its completed roof. For this
reason, the 9-foot roofing poles were placed off-
center, with the two extra feet resting on the ground
to the right of the main room.
Whenever practical, expedient shelters should
be built so that they can be readily enlarged to make
semi-permanent livingquarters. Afterit becomessafe
to emerge for limited periods, occupants could sleep
and spend much of their waking time in such a
rainproof dugout that affords excellent protection
against continuing radiation. In cold weather, living
in a dugout like this is more comfortable than living
in a tent or shack. Afterthe fallout radiation dose rate
outdoors has decayed to lessthan about 2R per hour,
the small vertical entry could be enlarged arid
converted to a steeply inclined stairway.
The importance of giving inexperienced shelter
builders detailed instructions is illustrated by the
unnecessary work done by the young women shown
in Fig. 5.2. They had agreed to try to build a Pole-
Covered Trench. Shelter, working unassisted and
using only hand tools. Because the summer sun in
Utah was hot, they selected a shady site under a large
tree. The briefinstructions they received included no
advice on the selection of a building site. Cuttingand
digging out the numerous roots was very difficult for
them and required several of the 22 hours they spent
actually working.
Another disadvantage of making a shelterunder
trees is that more of the gamma rays from fallout
particles on the leaves and branches would reach and
penetrate the shelter than if these same particles were
on the ground. Many gamma rays from fallout
particles on the ground would be scattered or
absorbed by striking rocks, clods of earth, tree
trunks, or houses before reaching a belowground
shelter.
Fig. 5.2. Two non-athletic college girls who completed a 4-person Pole-Covered Trench Shelter in 351/2
hours, despite tree roots.TYPES OF SHIELDING
Shelters provide protection against radiation by
utilizing two types of shielding: barriershielding and
geometry shielding.
• Barrier shielding is shown by Fig. 5.3, a
simplified illustration. (Ina realfallout area,amanin
an open trench would have fallout particles all over
and around him.) The 3-foot thickness of earth
shown (or a 2-foot thickness ofconcrete) willprovide
an effective barrier, attenuating (absorbing) about
99.9% of all gamma rays from fallout. (In the
illustration, only a single fallout particle 3 feet from
the edge of the trench is considered.) Only one
gamma ray oui of 1000could penetrate the 3 feet of
earth shown and strike the person in the trench. Rays
from particles farther away than 3 feet would be
negligible; rays from particlescloserthan 3feet would
be attenuated according to the thickness of earth
between the fallout particleand the man in.the trench.
However, the man in the trench would not be
protected from "skyshine," which is caused by
gamma rays scattering after striking the nitrogen,
oxygen, and other atoms of the air. The man's
exposed head, which is just below ground level,
would be hit byabout one-tenthas manygamma rays
as if it were 3feet above ground (Fig. 5.3). Even ifall
fallout could be kept out ofthe trench and off the man
and every part of the ground within 3feet of the edges
of the trench, skyshine from heavy fallout on the
surrounding ground could deliver a fatal radiation
dose to the man in the open trench.
Skyshine reaches the ground from alldirections.
If the man were sitting in a deeper trench, he would
escape more of this scattered radiation, but not all of
it. For good protection he must be protected
overhead and on all sides by barrier shielding.
The barrier shielding of the Pole-Covered
Trench Shelter shown in Fig. 5.4 was increased by
shoveling additional earth onto its "buried roof."
After father and son had mounded earth about 18
inches deep over the centerline of the roof poles, a
large piece of 4-mil-thick polyethylene was placed
over the mound. This waterproofmaterialserved as a
"buried roof" after it was covered with more earth.
Any rainwater trickling through the earth above the
plastic would have run off the sloping sides of the
"buried roof" and away from the shelter.
• Geometry shielding reduces the radiation dose
received by shelter occupants by increasing the
distances between them and fallout particles, and by
ORNL-DWG 78·7205
Fig. 5.3. Simplified illustration of barrier shielding and skyshine (scattered gamma radiation). An open
trench provides poor protection.Fig. 5.4. Increasing the barrier shielding over a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter.
providing turns in the openings leading into the
shelter. Figure 5.5 isa sectionaldrawingof the shelter
entry built by the Utah family.
The farther you can keep away from a source
either of light or of harmful radiation, the lesslight or
other radiation will reach you. If fallout particles are
on the roof of a tall building and you are in the
basement, you will receivea much smaller radiation
dose from those particles than if they were on the
floor justabove you. Likewise, ifeithervisible light or
gamma rays are comingthroughan openingat the far
end of a passageway, less will reach you at the other
end if the passageway is long than if it is short.
Turns in passageways are very effective in
reducing the amount of radiation entering a shelter
through them. A right-angle turn, either from a
vertical or horizontal entry, causes a reduction of
about 90%.
Note: Fallout shelters need not provideadditional
shielding to protect occupants against initial nuclear
radiation that is emitted from the fireballs of nuclear
explosions. (See Figs. 1.I and 1.4.) Large nuclear
weapons would beemployed inan attack on the United
States. The initial nuclear radiation from the
sizes of explosions that may endanger Amer-
icans would be greatly reduced in passing
through the miles of air between the fireballs
and those fallout shelters far enough away to
survive the blast effects. The smaller an explo-
sion, the larger the dose of initial nuclear
radiation it delivers at a given blast overpres-
sure distance from ground zero. (For a discussion
of the more difficult shielding requirements of blast
shelters that would enable occupants to survive blast
effects much closer to explosions and therefore would
besubjected to much larger exposures of initial nuclear
radiation, see Appendix D, Expedient Blast Shelters.)
Figure 5.6 shows the completed shelter after it
was occupied by the family ofsixjust 32112 hoursafter
receiving the shelter-building instructions and
beginning preparations to evacuate. (This family won
a bonus for completion within 36 hours and also a
larger bonus given if all members then stayed inside
continuously for at least 72 hours.) To get a better
idea of how six people can liveinsucha small shelter,
look at the drawings at the end of Appendix A.2.
In warm or hot weather, shelters, especially
crowded ones, must be well ventilated and cooled by
an adequate volume of outdoor air pumped through
them. This family had built an efficient homemade air
pump (a KAP) and used it as described in Chapter 6
and Appendix R.ORNL-DWG 78-7204
SHELTER ROOM
THRESHOLD 80ARD
Fig. 5.5. Skyshine coming into a shelter through a vertical entry would be mostly absorbed while turning
into and traveling down the entryway trench.
Fig. 5.6. Earth mounded over a 31h-foot-wide Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. The canvas canopy would
protect the vertical entry against both fallout and rain. (Asmaller canopyover the air duct-emergencyexit at the
other end is obscured by the mounded earth.)All of the earthexcavated indiggingthe trenches
was mounded over the roof poles, making a covering
30 inches deep. This shelter had a protection factor
(PF) of over 300;that is,persons inside would receive
less than 1/300th of the gamma-ray dose of fallout
radiation that they would receive if they were
standing outside in the open.
To have made the roof covering more than 36
inches thick would not have increased the protection
against radiation very much, unless the entry trench
and the air duct-emergency exit trench had been dug
considerably longer. Field tests have shown that
some families, given only 48 hours, cannot dig the
longer trenches, cut the additional poles, and shovel
on the additional earth necessary for a shelter that
would offer significantly betterprotection than the
sheltershown here. The Pole-CoveredTrenchShelter
and the other shelters described in Appendix A all
have been built byuntrained families within 48hours,
the minimum time assumed to be available to
Americans before a possible attack if the Russians'
should begin tq evacuate their cities.
EARTH ARCHING USED TO
STRENGTHEN SHELTERS
Several types of expedient shelters can be made
to withstand greater pressures if their roofs are built
of yielding materials and covered with enough earth
to attain "earth arching." This arching results when
the yielding ofthe roofcauses partofthe load carried
by the roof to be shifted to the overlying earth
particles, which become rearranged in such a way
that an arch is formed. This arch carries the load to
surrounding supports that are less yielding. These
supports often include adjacent earth that has not
been disturbed.
To attain earth arching, the earth covering the
yielding roofmust be at least as deep as half the width
of the roof between its supports. Then the resultant
earth arch above the roof carries most of the load.
(A familiar example of effective earth arching is
its use with sheet metal culverts under roads. The
arching in a few feet of earth over a thin-walled
culvert prevents it from being crushed by the weight
of heavy vehicles.)
Figure 5.7shows how a flexible roofyields under
the weight of 30 inches ofearth mounded over it and
how earth arching develops. Afterthe arch isformed,
the only weight that the yielding roofsupports isthe
weight of the small thickness of earth between the
roof and the bottom of the arch.
Protective earth archingalso results ifa shelteris
covered with a material that compresses when
loaded, or if the whole roof or the whole shelter can
be pushed down a little without being broken.
ORNl·DWG 78·7441
1 It
Fig. 5.7. Earth arching over a yielding roof enables a shelter to withstand much greater pressures.SHELTER AGAINST BETA AND
ALPHA PARTICLES
In addition to the invisible, light-like gamma
rays, fallout particles radiate two types of hazardous
invisible particles: beta and alpha particles. These
radiations would be minor dangers to informed
people in fallout areas, especially to those who had
entered almost any kind ofshelter before the fallout
began to be deposited in their area.
• Beta particles are high-speed electrons given off
by some of the radioactive atoms in fallout. Only the
highest-energy beta particlescan penetrate more than
about 10feet ofairor about I/Xinch of water, wood, or
human body tissue. Any building that keeps out
fallout particles will prevent injury from beta radia-
tion.
The only frequently serious dangers are from (I)
internal beta-radiation doses from fallout-
contaminated food or drink, and (2) beta burns from
fresh fallout particles. Fresh fallout particles are no
more than a few days old and therefore very
radioactive. If fresh particles remain: for at least
several tens of minutes in contact with the skin, beta
burns are likely to result. If only thin clothing
separates fresh fallout particles from the skin, a
considerably longer time will elapse before their
radiation causes beta burns.
In dry, windy weather, fresh fallout particles
might get inside one's nose and ears, along with dust
and sand, and could cause beta burns ifnot promptly
washed off or otherwise removed.
Prompt washing will prevent beta burns. If
water .is not available, brushing and rubbing the
fallout particles off the skin will help.
If a person is exposed outdoors where there is
heavy, fresh fallout for a long enough time to receive'
a large dose of gamma radiation, the highest-energy
beta radiation given off by fresh fallout particles on
the ground may be a relatively minor danger to his
eyes and skin. Even ordinary glasses give good
protection to the eyes against such beta radiation,
and ordinary clothing gives good protection to the
skin.
Ordinary clothing will shield and protect the
body quite well from all but the highest-energy beta
particles given off by fresh fallout deposited on the
clothing. Fallout-contaminated clothing should be
removed as soon as practical, or at least brushed and
beaten before entering a shelter room, to rid it of as
many fallout particles as possible. (Fallout particles
that are many days old will not cause beta burns
unless large quantities are on the body for hours.)
Most of the knowledge about beta burns on
human skin was gathered as a result of an accident
during the largest U.S. H-bomb test in the tropical
Pacific." Winds blew the fallout in a direction not
anticipated by the meteorologists. Five hours after
the multimegaton surface burst, some natives of the
Marshall Islands noticed a white powder beginning
to be deposited on everything exposed, including
their bare, moist skin. Unknown to them, the very
small particles were fresh fallout. (Most fallout is
sand-like, but fallout from bursts that have cratered
calcareous rock, such as coral reefs and limestone, is
powdery or flakey, and white.) Since the natives knew
nothing about fallout, they thought the white dust
was ashes from a distant volcanic eruption. For two
days, until they were removed from their island
homes and cared for by doctors, they paid practically
no attention to the white dust. Living inthe open and
in lightly constructed homes, they received from the
fallout all around them a calculated gamma-ray dose
ofabout 175 R in the two days they were exposed.
The children played in the fallout-contaminated
sand. The fallout on these islanders' scalps, bare
necks, and the tops of their bare feet caused itching
and burning sensations after a time. Days later, beta
burns resulted, along with extreme discoloration of
the skin. Beta burns are not deep burns; however, it
took weeks to heal them. Some, in spite of proper
medical attention, developed into ulcers. (No serious
permanent skin injury resulted, however.)
For survivors confined inside crowded,
unsanitary shelters by heavy fallout, and without
medicines, beta burns could be a worse problemthan
were similar burns to the Marshall Islanders.
All of the Marshall Islanders unknowingly ate
fallout-contaminated food and drank fallout-
contaminated water for two days. Mainly as a result
of this, radioactive iodine was concentrated in their
thyroid glands, and thyroid abnormalities developed
years later. (There isa simple, very low-cost means of
attaining almost complete protection against this
delayed hazard: taking minute prophylactic doses of
a salt, potassium iodide. This will be discussed in
Chapter 13.)
In dry, dusty, windy areas the human nasal
passages usually filter out much dust. A large part of
it is swallowed and may be hazardous if the dust is
contaminated with fallout. Under such dry, windy
conditions, beta burns also could be caused by large
amounts of dust lodged inside the nasal passages.
Breathing through a dust mask, towel, or other clothwould give good protection against this localized
hazard. In conclusion: persons under nuclear attack
should make considerable effort to protect them-
selves from beta radiation.
• Alpha particles, identical to the nuclei ofhelium
atoms, are given off by some of the radioactiveatoms
in fallout. These particles have very little penetrating
power: 1 to 3 inches of air will stop them. It is
doubtful that alpha particles can get through
unbroken skin; they cannot penetrate even a thin
fabric.' Alpha particles are hazardous only if
materials that emit them (such as the radioactive
element plutonium) enter the body and are retained
in bone, lung tissue, or other parts of the body. Any
shelter that excludes fallout .particles affords
excellent protection against this radiation danger.
Unless survivors eat or drink fallout-contaminated
food or water in considerably larger quantities than
did the completely uninformed natives of the
Marshall Islands, danger from alpha particles would
be minor.
PROTECTION AGAINST OTHER NUCLEAR
WEAPONS EFFECTS
• Flash burns are caused by the intense rays of
heat emitted from the fireball within the first minute
following an explosion." This thermal radiation
travels at the speed of light and starts to heat or burn
exposed people and materials before the arrival ofthe
blast wave. Thermal radiation is reduced-but not
eliminated-ifit passes through rain, dense clouds, or
thick smoke. On a clear day, serious flash burns on a
person's exposed skin can be caused bya 20-megaton
explosion that is 25 miles away.
A covering of clothing-preferably of white
cloth that reflects light-can reduce or prevent flash
burns on those who are in a large part of an area in
which thermal radiation is a hazard. However, in
areas close enough to ground zero for severe blast
damage, the clothing of exposed people could be set
on fire and their bodies badly burned.
• Fires ignited by thermal radiation and those
resulting from blast and other causes especially
would endanger people pinned down by fallout while
in or near flammable buildings. Protective measures
against the multiple dangers from fire, carbon mon-
oxide, and toxic smokes are discussed in Chapter 7.
• Flash blindness can be caused by the intense
light from an explosion tens of miles away in clear
weather. Although very disturbing, the blindness is
not permanent; most victims recover within seconds
to minutes. Among the Hiroshima and Nagasaki
survivors (people who had been in the open more
than persons expecting a nuclear attack would be),
there were a number of instances of temporary
blindness that lasted as long as 2 or 3 hours, but only
one case of permanent retinal injury was reported."
Flash blindness may be produced by scattered
light; the victim of this temporary affliction usually
has not looked directlyat the fireball. Flash blindness
would be more severe at night, when the pupils are
larger. Retinal burns, a permanent injury, can result
at great distances if the eye is focused on the fireball.
People inside any shelter with no openings
through which light can shine directly would be
protected from flash burns and eye damage. Persons
in the open with adequate warning of a nuclear
explosion can protect themselves from both flash
blindness and retinal burns by closing or shielding
their eyes. They should get behind anything casting a
shadow- quickly.
SKIN BURNS FROM HEATED DUST
(THE POPCORNING EFFECT)
When exposed grains of sand and particles of
earth are heated very rapidly by intense thermal
radiation, they explode like popcorn and pop up into
the air." While this dust is airborne, the continuing
thermal radiation heats it to temperatures that may
be as high as several thousand degrees Fahrenheit on
a clear day in areas of severe blast. Then the shock
wave and blast winds arrive and can carry the
burning-hot air and dust into an open shelter.6.9
Animals inside open shelters have been singed and
seriously burned in some of the nuclearair-burst tests
in Nevada."
Thus Japanese working inside an open tunnel-
shelter at Nagasaki within about 100yards ofground
zero were burned on the portion oftheir skin that was
exposed to the entering blast wind, even though they
were protected by one or two turns in the tunnel.4
(None of these Japanese workers who survived the
blast-wave effects had fatal burns or suffered serious
radiation injuries, which they certainly would have
suffered had they been outside and subjected to the
thermal pulse and the intense initial nuclear radiation
from the fireball.)
Experiments conducted during several nuclear
test explosions have established the amount of
thermal radiation that must be delivered to exposed
earth to produce the popcorning effect." Large air
bursts may result inexposed skin beingburned by hotdust and heated air produced at overpressure ranges
as low as 3 or 4 psi. However, calculations indicate
that the large surface bursts most likely to endanger
Americans would not result in the occupants ofsmall,
open shelters being burned by these effects-i-except
at somewhat higher overpressures.
Protection is simple against the heated dust and
very hot airthat may be blown into an openshelterby
the blast. When expecting an attack, occupants of an
open shelter should keep towels or other cloths in
hand. When they see the bright light from an explo-
sion, they should cover their heads and exposed skin.
If time and materials are available, much better
protection is given by making expedient blast doors,
as described in Appendix D. When occupants seethe
very bright light from a large explosion miles away,
they can close and secure such doors before the
arrival of the blast wave several seconds later.
ESSENTIAL LIFE-SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
Shelters can be built to give excellent protection
against all nuclear weapon effects, except in places
within or very close to cratered areas. But most
shelters would be of little use inareas of heavy fallout
unless supplied with enough life-support equipment
to enable occupants to stay inthe shelters until condi-
tions outside become endurable. In heavy fallout
areas most high-protection-factor shelters would be
crowded; except in cold weather, most would need a
ventilating pump to remove warmed air and bring in
enough cooler outdoor air to maintain survivable
temperature-humidity conditions. Means for storing
adequate water is another essential life-support
requirement. These and other essential or highly
desirable life-support needs are covered in following
chapters.
BASEMENT SHELTERS
The blast and fire effects of a massive, all-out
attack of the magnitude possible in 1987 would
destroy or damage most American homes and
other buildings and endanger the occupants of
shelters inside them. Outside the blast and/or
fire areas, the use of shelters inside buildings
would not be nearly as hazardous. However, an
enemy might also target some areas into which
large numbers of urbanAmericans hadevacua-
ted before the attack, although such targetting
is notbelievedto be included inSovietstrategy.
Earth-covered expedient shelters in a blast area
give better protection against injury from blast, fire,
or fallout than do almost all basements. But during
the more likely kinds of crises threatening nuclear
war most urban Americans, including those who
would evacuate into areas outside probable blast
areas, probably would lack the tools, materials,
space, determination, physical strength, or time
required to build good expedient shelters that are
separate from buildings and covered with earth. As a
result, most unprepared urban citizens would have to
use basements and other shelters in existing
structures, for want of better protection.
Shelters in buildings, including basement shelters,
have essentially the same requirements as expedient
shelters: adequate shielding against fallout radiation,
strength, adequate ventilation-cooling, water, fallout
radiation meters, food, hygiene,etc.Sketches and short
descriptions of ways to improve the fallout protection
afforded by home basements are to befound in widely
distributed civil defense pamphlets, including two
entitled "In Time of Emergency," and "Protection in
the Nulear Age." In 1987, millions of copies of
these pamphlets are stockpiled for possible
distributionduringa crisis.Unfortunately, most
of such official instructions were written years
ago, whenthedeliverable megatonnage andthe
numberof Sovietwarheadswere smallfractions
of what they are today. Official civil defense
instructions now available to average Ameri-
cans do not inform the reader as to what degree of
protection against fallout radiation (what protection
factor) isgiven by the differenttypes of do-it-yourself
shelters pictured. There is no mention of dependable
ways to provide adequate cooling-ventilation, an
essential requirement ifeven a home basementisto be
occupied by several families in warm or hot weather.
Outdated or inadequate information is given about
water, food, the improvement of shelter in one's
home, and other survival essentials.
No field-tested instructions at present are
available to guide householders who may want to
strengthen the floor over a home basement so that it
can safely support 2feet of shieldingearth piled on it.
In areas of heavy fallout, such strengthening- often
would be needed to safely support adequate overhead
shielding, especially ifthe house were to bejarredby a
light shock from a distant explosion. In the following
paragraphs, a way to greatly improve the fallout
protection afforded by a typical home basement is
outlined. If improved in this manner, a basement
would provide excellent fallout protectionfor several
families.
First, earth should be placed on the floor above
to a depth of about one foot. Earth can be carried
efficiently by using sacks or pillowcases, using the
techniques described in Chapter 8for carryingwater.
If earth is not available because the ground isfrozenor because of the lack of digging tools, other heavy
materials (containers of water, heavy furniture,
books, etc.) should be placed on the floor above.
These materials should weigh enough to produce a
loading of about 90 pounds per square foot-about
the same weight as earth one foot thick. This initial
loading of the floor joists causes them to carry some
of the weight that otherwise would be supported by
the posts that then are to be installed.
Next, a horizontal beam is installed so as to
support all of the floor joists under their centers.
Figure 5.8 shows a beam and one of its supporting
posts. Such a supporting beam preferably is made by
nailing three 2X6s securely together. (Three 2X4s
would serve quite well.)
DRHl-OWG 7g.18368
NOTCH (IN END
OF JOISTI THAT
RESTS ON WALL
BRACE BOARDS
PRESSED TIGHT
AGAINST THE
FOURWALLS
BASEMENT
FLOOR
Fig. 5.8. Supporting beam and one of its posts
installed to increase the load of shielding material
that can be carried safely by the floor above a
home basement.
Cut posts to fitexactly underthe beam. Iftrees at
least 4 inches in diameter are not available, make
posts by nailing boards together. Position the two
outermost posts within 2 feet of the ends of the beam.
Space the posts at even intervals, with each post
under a floor joist. A post under every third joist is
ideal; this usually means a spacing between posts of
about 41(2 feet. Ifthe basement is20 feet long, 5 posts
are enough. Nail each post to the beam, and secure
the bases of each with brace boards laid on the
basement floor, as illustrated.
Finally, place a second l-foot-thick layer of
earth on the floor above. Ifthe basement windowsare
protected with boards and if all but a part of one
window and all the aboveground parts of the
basement walls are covered with earth 2feet thick, the
basement shelter will have a protection factor of
several hundred against fallout radiation.
Adequate ventilation and cooling should be
assured by using a homemade air pump (a KAP),
made and installed as described in Appendix B.
Forced ventilation is especially necessary if more
than one family occupies the basement in warm or
hot weather.
More work and materials are. required to
improve a home basement in this manner than are
needed -to build a covered-trench shelter for one
family. An earth-covered shelter separate from
buildings will provide equally good protection
against radiation, better protectionagainst blast, and
much better protection against fire.
If a family cannot build a separate, earth-
covered shelter outdoors, often it would be advisable
to make a very small shelter in the most protected
corner of the basement. Such an indoor shelter
should be of situp height (about 40 inches for tall
people) and no wider than 3 feet. Its walls can readily
be built of chairs, benches, boxes, and bureau
drawers. Interior doors make an adequately strong
roof. Expedient shielding materials, to be placed on
the roof and the two exposed sides, can be ordinary
water containers and bureau drawers, boxes, and
pillow cases filled with earth orotherheavy materials.
Or, if heavy-duty plastic trash bags or 4-mil
polyethylene film are available, make expedient
water containers and use them for shielding. To do
so, first line bureau drawers, boxes, pillow cases,
trash cans, etc. with plastic. Place the lined containers
in position to shield your shelter, then fill these
expedient water containers with drinkable water (see
Chapter 8).
As demonstrated by hot-weather occupancy
tests of such very small indoor shelters, a small KAP
or other air pump must be operated to maintain a
forced flow of air through such a crowded shelter, to
prevent intolerable temperature-humidity
conditions. (See Chapter 6 for ventilation-cooling
requirements, including the provision of an
adequately large opening in each end of a shelter.) In
some basements a second small KAP would be
needed in hot weather to pump outdoor air through
the basement. This KAPcould be operated by pullinga cord from within the small shelter, using an
improvised "pulley" as described in Appendix B.
PUBLIC SHELTERS
In the event of an unexpected attack, many
unprepared Americans should and would take refuge
in nearby marked public shelters. Throughout the
populated areas that would not be subjected to blast,
fire. or heavy fallout, the use of public shelters could
save millions of lives. All persons concerned with
survival should remember that the large majority of
officially surveyed and marked shelters give better
protection against radiation than most unimproved
home basements..
Persons preparingto go to publicshelters should
be aware that many lack forced ventilation and that
the blowers and fans of most forced ventilation
systems would be stopped by loss of electric power
due to electromagnetic pulse effects or by other
effects of nuclear explosions on electrical systems. A
blast wave at an overpressure range as low as I psi
(144 pounds per square foot) would wreck most
shelter-ventilating fans. In 1987, no water or food
normally is stocked. A person who brought to a
public shelter 10large plastic trash bags and 10pillow
slips, to make 10 expedient water bags in which 60
gallons of water could be stored (as described in
Chapter 8), would help both himself and dozens of
other shelter occupants. If he hoped to share the
basement in a strange family's home, his chances of
being welcomed would be improved if he brought a
small homemade shelter-ventilating pump and other
survival items. The same small pump would be
impractical in a large public shelter. An Oak Ridge
National Laboratory study completed in 1978found
that if all citizens were to go to National Shelter
Survey (:\'55) shelters within one mile of their homes,
69CC of those who found space would be in shelters
rated for 1000 or more occupants.'? The average
number of shelter spaces in this largestclass of public
shelters was 3179. The prospect of living in an
unequipped shelter crowded with this many
unprepared people-each of whom would have only
10square feet of floor space--is a strong motivation
to work hard to build and equip a small, earth-
covered shelter.
DECIDING WHAT KIND OF SHELTER
TO BUILD OR USE
Before deciding what kind of shelter you and
your family should build or use, it isbest to read all of
this book. Your final decision should include
consideration of ways to provide life-support
equipment discussed in following chapters. At this
stage, however, the reader will find it helpful to
review important reasons why different types of
shelters offer the best hope of survival to different
people, in different areas, and under different
conditions.
This book is written primarily to improve the
survival chances of people who cannot or do not
build permanent shelters. The information which
follows will help you select the best expedient or
available shelter for your family.
SHELTER NEAR OR IN YOUR HOME
If your 'home is 10 or more miles from an
average target such as a major airport with long
runways, or is20or more miles from a great city with
several strategic targets, you are fortunate: you can
prudently build or use a shelter close to home. No
one can foretell accurately which way the winds will
blow or where weapons will explode, so, if practical,
you should build a shelterthat gives better protection
against fallout, blast, and fire than shelters in build-
ings. Most people living outside targeted areas could
build such a shelter in two days or less, using one of
the designs of earth-covered expedient shelters
detailed in Appendix A.
Even if you plan to evacuate, you should decide
where you would take shelternearby incase you were
unable to do so. There is always a chance that an
attack may be launched without warning, giving
insufficient time to evacuate. Or the missile aimed at
the area in which you live may miss its target. If your
targeted home area were not hit, moderately heavy
fallout might be the only danger; even an improved
basement shelter would be adequate in that case.
EARTH-COVERED EXPEDIENT
FAMILY SHELTERS
Advantages of earth-covered, expedient family
shelters:
• Better protection against heavy fallout, blast,
and fire than afforded by the great majority of
shelters in buildings.
• The possibility of building in favorable
locations, including places far removed from target
areas, and places where it is impractical to build or to
improve large group-shelters giving good protection.• The opportunity for men, women, and
children to work together to providegood protection
in minimum time.
• A better chance to benefit from thoughtful
preparations made in advance than would be the case
in public shelters where water, food, etc. must be
shared.
• Less risk of personality clashes, hysteria under
stress, exposure to infectious diseases, and other
problems that arise when strangers are crowded
together for days or weeks.
Disadvantages of earth-covered, expedient
shelters:
• It may be difficult to meet the requirementfor
time, space, people able to work hard, materials, and
tools-and to get all these together at the building
site.
• Building is difficult if heavy rain or snow is.
falling or if the ground is deeply frozen. (However,
untrained Americans have built good fallout shelters
with shielding provided by 5 or more feet of packed
snow, 11 including a winterversion of the Crib-Walled
Pole Shelter described in Appendix A. The practi-
cality of several Russian designs of snow-covered
expedient shelters also has been demonstrated by
winter construction tests in Colorado.")
• The fewer occupants of family shelters could
not provide as many helpful skills as would be found
in most public shelters, with tens-to-thousands of
occupants.
• The lack of instruments for measuring
changing radiation dangers. However, the occupants
could make a homemade fallout meter by following
the instructions in Appendix C, or buy a commercial
instrument before a rapidly worsening crisis arises.
PUBLIC AND OTHER EXISTING SHELTERS
Advantages of the great majority of public and
other existingshelters, most of which are in buildings:
• Their immediate availability in many
localities, without work or the need to supply
materials and tools.
• The provision of fair-to-excellent fallout
protection-generally much better than citizens have
available in their homes.
• The availability in some shelters of fallout
metersand occupantswho know how to use themand
who can provide other needed skills.
• The chance for persons who are not able to
carry food or water to a public shelter to share some
brought by the more provident occupants.
Disadvantages of the great majority of public
and other existing shelters available to large numbers
of people:
• The location of most of themin targeted areas.
• Poor protection against blast, fire and carbon
monoxide.
* Lack of water and means for storing it,
and lack of stocked food.
• No reliable air pumps, which are essential in
warm or hot weatherfor supplyingadequateventilat-
ing-cooling air to maintain endurable conditions in
fully occupied shelters-especially belowground.
• Uncertainties regarding the availability of
fallout meters and occupants who know how to use
them.
• No dependable lights, sanitary facilities, or
other life-support equipment, with few exceptions.
• The crowding together of large numbers of
people who are strangers to each other. Under
frightening conditions that mightcontinue for weeks,
the greater the number of people, the greater would
be the risks of the spread ofinfectiousdiseasesand of
hysteria, personality clashes, and the development of
other conflicts.
BELOWGROUND EXPEDIENT EARTH-
COVERED FALLOUT SHELTERS
(Appendix A details two designs of below-
ground shelters, three designs of aboveground
shelters, and one design that affords excellent
protection built either below or aboveground).
Advantages of belowground, earth-covered
expedient fallout shelters:
• They afford better protection than do above-
ground, earth-covered types.
• Less time, work, and materials are required to
build them than to build equally protective above-
ground designs.* If built sufficiently separated from houses and
flammable woods, they provide much better protection
against fire hazards than do shelters in buildings.
* If dug in stable earth, even types with unshored
earth walls give quite good blast protection up to
overpressure ranges of at least 5 psi - where most
homes and buildings would be destroyed by blast or
fire.
Disadvantages of belowgroundexpedient fallout
shelters:
* They are not practical in areas where the water
table or rock is very near the surface.
* It is impractical to build them in deep-frozen
ground.
* They are usually more crowded- and uncom-
fortable than improved basement shelters.
EXPEDIENT BLAST SHELTERS
Advantages of expedient blast shelters:
* Occupants of expedient blast shelters de-
scribed in Appendix D could survive uninjured in
extensive blast areas where fallout shelters would not
prevent death or injury.
* Blast doors would protect occupants from shock
waves, dangerous overpressures, blast winds, and
burns on exposed skin caused by the popcorningeffect
and heated air.
* The expedient blast shelters described in
Appendix D of this book were built and blast
tested in Defense Nuclear Agency blast tests.
Their air-supply systems were not damaged by
blasteffectsthatwould have bentoverorbroken
off the aboveground, vertical air-supply pipes
typical of even expensive imported Swiss and
Finnish permanent family blast shelters. (Not-
withstanding this weakness, such permanent
blast shelters will save many lives.) The hori-
zontal blastdoors ofthese testedexpedient blast
shelters were not damaged because they were
protected on all sides by spiked-together blast-
protector logs surrounded by ramped earth. (In
contrast, the horizontal blast door of the most
expensive blast shelter described in a widely
distributed Federal Emergency Management
Agency pamphlet (number H-12-3) is unpro-
tected on its sides. This untested blast door
probably would be torn off and blown away if
struck by a strong blast wave, following blast
winds, and pieces ofhouses and treesthat would
be hurled hundreds of feet.)
* The blast-tested expedient blast valve de-
scribed in Appendix D will prevent entry of
blastwaves througha shelter'sventilationpipes
and resultant destruction of the ventilation
pump and possible injury of occupants.
Disadvantages of expedient blast shelters:
* They require more time, materials, tools,
skill, and work than are needed for building
expedient fallout shelters.
* Especially expedient blast shelters should
be well separated from buildings and woods
that if burned are likely to produce dangerous
quantities ofcarbon monoxide and toxic smoke.
* Theirventilation openings permitthe entry
of many morefallout particles than do the venti-
lation pipes with goosenecks andfilters oftypi-
cal permanent blast shelters. (However, deadly
local fallout probably willnot be a majordanger
in the blast areas where the great majority of
Americans live, because a rational enemy will
employ air bursts to destroy the mostly "soft"
targets found in those areas. Air bursts can
destroy mostmilitarily significant"soft" targets
over about twice as many square miles as can
the surface or near-surface burstingofthe same
weapons. Fortunately, air bursts produce only
tiny particles, and only a smallfraction ofthese,
while they still are very radioactive, are likely
to be promptly broughtto earth in scattered"hot
spots" by rain-outs and snow-outs. Thus rela-
tively few prompt fatalities or delayed cancer
cases from air-burstfallout are likelyto result-
even from the air bursting of today's smaller
Soviet warheads that would inject most oftheir
particles into the troposphere at altitudes from
which wet deposition can take place.
WARNING: Permanent home fallout and
blast shelters described in widely available
FEMA pamphlets have protection factors in
line with the PF 40 minimum standard for
public shelters in buildings. In heavy fallout
areas a sizeable fraction of the occupants of PF
40 shelters will receive radiation doses large
enough to incapacitate or kill them later. Per-
manent shelters built specifically to protect
against nuclear weapon effects should have
PFs much higher than PF 40.
None of the permanent home or family
shelters described in official OCD, DCPA, or
FEMA free shelter-building instruction pam-
phlets have been built for evaluation and/or
testing - a finding confirmed to the author in
1987 by a retired shelterspecialistwhofor some
20 years served in Washington with FEMA and
its predecessors.Chapter 6
Ventilation and Cooling of Shelters
CRITICAL IMPORTANCE
If high-protection-factor shelters or most other
shelters that lack adequate forced ventilation were
Iullv occupied for several days in warm or hot
weather. they would become so hot and humid that
the occupants would collapse from the heat if they
were to remain inside. It is important to understand
that the heat and water vapor given off by the bodies
of people in a crowded, long-occupied shelter could
be deadly if fallout prevents leaving the shelter.
When people enter an underground shelter or
basement in the summertime. at first the air feels
cool. However. if most shelters are fully occupied for
a fe\\ days without adequate ventilation. the floors.
walls. and ceilings. originally cool. will have
absorbed about all the body heat of which they arc
capable. Some shelters will become dangerously hot
in a few hours. Unless most of the occupants' body
heat and water vapor from sweat are removed by
air circulated through a typical shelter. the heat-
humidity conditions will become increasingly dan-
.gerous in warm or hot weather. One of the most
important nuclear war survival skills people should
learn is how to keep occupied shelters adequately
ventilated in all seasons and cool enough for many
days of occupancy in warm or hot weather. Methods
for ventilating with homemade devices and for
keeping ventilating air from carrying fallout
particles into shelters are described in Appen-
dices A and B. Instructions for Directional
Fanning, the simplest means for forcing ade-
quate volumes of air to flow through shelters,
are given at the end of this chapter.
MAKING AND USING AN EXPEDIENT
AIR PUMP
The best expedient way to maintain livable
conditions in a shelter, especially in hot weather, isto
make and use a large-volume shelter-ventilating
pump. Field tests have proved that average Ameri-
cans can build the expedient air pump described in
Appendix B in a few hours, with inexpensive
materials found in most households.
This simple pump was invented in 1962 by the
author. I called it a Punkah-Pump, because its hand-
pulled operation is somewhat like that of an ancient
fan called a "punkah", still used by some primitive
peoples in hot countries. (Unlike the punkah,
however, this air pump can force air to move in a
desired direction and is a true purnp.) It was named
the Kearny Air Pump (KAP) by the Office of Civil
Defense following tests of various models by
Stanford Research Institute, the Protective Struc-
tures Development Center, and General American
Transportation Company. These tests confirmed
findings first made at Oak Ridge National Labora-
tory regarding the advantages of the KAP both as a
manually operated pump for forcing large volumes of
outdoor air through shelters and as a device for
distributing air within shelters and fanning the
occupants. See Fig. 6.1.
The air pump instructions given in Appendix B
are the result of having scores offamilies and pairs of
untrained individuals, including children, build and
use this air pump. They were guided by successively
improved versions of these detailed, written instruc-
tions, that include many illustrations (see Appendix
B). Some people who are experienced at building
things will find these instructions unnecessarily long
and detailed. However, shelter-building experiments
have shown that the physically stronger individuals,
usually the more experienced builders, should do
more of the hard, manual work when shelters are
built, and that those less experienced at building
should do the lighter work-including making
shelter-ventilating pumps. These detailed, step-by-
step instructions have enabled people who neverFig. 6.1. A 6-foot KAP tested for durability at
Oak Ridge. After 1000 hours of operation during
which it pumped air through a room at a rate of4000
cubic feet per minute (4000 cfrn), there were only
minor tears in the plastic flaps.
before had attempted to build a novel device of any
kind to make serviceable air pumps.
(The air pump instructions given in Appendix B
repeat some information in this chapter. This
repetition is included both to help the readerwhen he
starts to build an air pump and to increase the
chances of the best available complete instructions
being given to local newspapers during some future
crisis. The instructions given in this book could be
photographed. reproduced, and mass-distributed by
newspapers.)
Figure 6.2shows (behind the girl) a 20-inch-wide
by 36-inch-high KAP installed in the entry trench ofa
trench shelter. The father of the Utah family
described earlier had made this simple pump at
home, using only materials and tools found in many
homes-as described in Appendix B. He carried the
pump on top of his car to the shelter-building site.
The pendulum-like, flap-valve pump was swungfrom
two cabinet hinges (not shown) screwed onto a
board. The board was nailed to roof poles of the
narrow entry trench extending behind the girl in the
photograph. The pulI-cord was attached to the pump
frame below its hinged top and extended along one
trench wall for the whole length of the shelter. Any
Fig. 6.2. Behind the girl is the homemade air
pump that made it possible for a family of six to live
ina crowded trenchshelterfor more than threedays.
Outside the temperature rose to 93°F.
one of the six occupants could pull this cord and
easily pump as much as 300 cubic feet per minute of
outdoor air through the shelter and through the
insect screens over both its entrances. (Without these
screens, the numerous mosquitoes in this irrigated
area would have made the family's shelter stay very
unpleasant.)
During the 77 hours that the family continu-
ously occupied theirnarrow, covered trench, the tem-
peratures outside rose as high as 93°F. Without the
air pump, the six occupants would have been driven
from their shelter by unbearable temperature-
humidity conditions during the day."
The photo in Fig. 6.2 also shows how the air
pump hung when not being operated, partialIy
blocking the entry trench and causing a "chimney
effect" flow of air at night. There was a 10-inch space
between the air pump and the trench floor, and the
resulting flow of air maintained adequate ventilation
in the cool of the desert night, when outdoor
temperatures dropped as low as 45°F. Cool outdoor
air flowed down into the entry and under the
motionless air pump, replacing the body-warmed air
inside the shelter. The entering cool air continuouslyforced the warm air out of the shelter room at ceiling
height through the emergency crawlway-exhaust
trench at the other end. When the weather is cool, a
piece of plastic or tightly woven cloth could be hung
in the doorway of a well designed, narrow shelter, to
cause a flow of fresh air in the same manner.
Numerous shelter occupancy tests have proved
that modern Americans can live for weeks in an
adequately cooled shelter with only 10square feet of
floor space per person." Other tests, such as one
conducted by the Navy near Washington, D.C.
during an abnormally cool two weeks in August,
1962, have shown that conditions can become
difficult even when summertime outdoor air is being
pumped through a long-occupied shelter at the rate
of 12 cubic feet per minute, per person.v':" This is
four times the minimum ventilation rate for each
occupant specified bythe FederalEmergencyMan-
agement Agency (FEMA) for American shelters: 3
cubic feet per minute (3 cfm). Three cfm isabout three.
times the supply of outdoor air needed to keep healthy
people from having headaches as a result of exhaled
carbon dioxide. In hot, humid weather, much more
outdoor air than 12cfm per person must be supplied to
acrowded, long-occupiedshelter, as willbedescribed in
the following section and in Appendix B.
MAINTAINING ENDURABLE SHELTER
CONDITIONS IN HOT WEATHER .
The Navy test mentioned above showed how
much modern Americans who are accustomed to air
conditioning could learn from jungle natives about
keepingcool and healthy byskillfullyusing hot, humid,
outdoorair. Whileworking injunglesfrom the Amazon
to Burma, I observed the methods used by the natives
to avoid unhealthful conditions like those experienced
in the Navy shelter, which was ventilated in a conven-
tional American manner. Thesejungle methods include
the first five of the six cooling methods listed in this
section. During 24 years of civil defense research, my
colleagues and I have improved upon the cooling
methods of jungle people, primarily by the invention
and thorough field-testing of the homemade KAP
described in Appendix B, and of the Directional
Fans covered by the instructions at the end of
this chapter.
Even during a heat wave in a hot part of the
United States, endurable conditions can be main-
tained in a fully occupied, belowground shelter with
this simple pump, if the test-proven requirements
listed below are ALL met.
Most basement shelters and many aboveground
shelters also can be kept at livable temperatures in
hot weather if the cooling methods listed below are
ALL followed:
• Supply enough air to carry away all the shelter
occupants' body heat without raising the "effective
temperature" of the air at the exhaust end of the
shelter by more than 2°F. The "effective tempera-
ture" of the air to which a person is exposed is
equivalent to the temperature of air at 100%relative
humidity thatcauses the same sensation of warmth or
cold. "Effective temperature" combines the effects of
the temperature of the air, its relative humidity, and
its movement. An ordinary thermometer does not
measure effective temperature. In occupancy tests of
crowded shelters when the supply of outdoor air was
hot and dry, shelter occupants have been surprised to
find that they felt hottest at the air-exhaust end of
their shelter, where the temperature reading was
lower than at the air-intake end. Their sweaty bodies
had acted as evaporative air coolers, but their body
heat had raised the effective temperature, a reliable
indicator of heat stress. If40cubicfeet per minute(40
cfm) per person of. outdoor air is supplied and
properly distributed, then (even if the outdoor air is
at a temperature which is typical of the hottest hours
during a heat wave in a hot, humid area ofthe United
States) the effective temperature ofthe shelterairwill
be increased no more than 2°F by the shelter
occupants' body heat and water vapor. Except for a
relatively fewsick peopledependent on aircondition-
ing, anyone could endure air that has an effective
temperature only 2°F higher than that of the air
outdoors.
(There are exceptions to this ventilation require-
ment when the ceiling or walls of basement or
aboveground shelters in buildings are heated by the
sun to levels higher than skin temperature. In such
shelters, more than 40 cfm of outdoor air per
occupant must be supplied. However, if a shelter is
covered by at least two feet of earth, it will be so well
insulated that its ceiling and walls will not get hot
enough to heat the occupants.)
• Move the air gently, so as not to raise its
temperature. In the aforementioned Navy test, a high
speed, electric ventilating pump and the frictional
resistance of pipes and filters raised the temperature
of the air supplied to the shelter by 3°F. Under
extreme heat wave conditions, an air supply 3°F
hotter than outdoor air could be disastrous-espe-
cially ifconsiderably less than 40 cfm per occupant is
supplied, and body heat raises the air temperature
several additional degrees.• Distribute the air quite evenly throughout the
shelter. Ina trench shelter, where airispumped inat one
end and flows out the other, good distribution is
assured. Inlarger shelters, such as basements,ventilating
air willmove from the air-supplyopeningstraight to the
air-exhaust opening. Persons out of this air stream will
not be adequately cooled. By using one or more
additional, smallerKAPs (also described in Appendix
B), fresh air can be distributed easily throughout large
shelter rooms, and the occupants will be gently fanned.
• Provide occupants with adequate drinking water
and salt. In extremely hot weather, this means 4 quarts
of water per day per person and Itablespoon(10grams)
of salt, including the salt in food.
• Wear as few clothes as practical. When the skin is
bare, moving air can evaporate sweat more efficiently
for effective cooling. Air movement can keep bare skin
drier,and therefore lesssusceptible to heat rash and skin
infections. In the inadequately ventilated Navy test
shelter, 34ofthe99 initially healthyyoung men had heat
rash and 23had more seriousskin complaints at the end
of their sweaty two-week confinement, although their
overall physical condition had not deteriorated.IS How-
ever, at sick callevery day allofthese Navy test
subjects with skin complaints were treated by
medical corpsmen. In a nuclear war, very few
shelteroccupantswould have medicines to treat
skin diseases and infections, that if not taken
care of usually worsen rapidly under continu-
ously hot, humid conditions. Simple means for
preventingskin diseases andinfections-means
proved very effective by jungle natives and by
our best trained jungle infantrymen in World
War II - are described in the Prevention of Skin
Diseases section of Chapter 12.
• Keep pumping about 40 cfm of air per person
through the shelter both day and night during hot
weather, so that the occupants and the shelter itself will
be cooled off at night. In the Navy test, the ventilation
rate of 7 to 12 cfm was not high enough to give
occupantsthe partial relief from heat and sweatingthat
people normally get at night.'> In a National Academy
of Sciences meeting on protective shelters, an authority
stated: "Laboratoryexperimentsand fieldinvestigations
have shown that healthy persons at rest can tolerate
daily exposures to ETs [effective temperatures] up to
90°F, provided they can get a good night's sleep in a
coolerenvironment."14 An effectivetemperature90°F is
higher than the highest outdoor effective temperature
during a heatwave in the South or in American deserts.
ADEQUATE VENTILATION IN
COLD WEATHER
Infreezing weather, a belowground sheltercovered
with damp earth may continue to absorb almost all of
its occupants' body heat for many days and stay
unpleasantly cold. In one winter test of such a fully
occupied shelter,the temperature ofthe humidairinthe
shelterremainedaround 50°F.16 Undersuch conditions,
shelter occupants should continue to ventilate their
shelter adequately, to avoid the following conditions:
• A dangerous buildup of carbon dioxide from
exhaled breath, the first symptoms of which are
headaches and deeper breathing.
• Headaches from the carbon monoxide produced
by smoking. When the ventilation rate is low, smoking
should not be permitted,even nearthe exhaust opening.
• Headaches, collapse, or death due to carbon
monoxide from open fires or gasoline lanterns that
release gases into the shelter air.
NATURAL VENTILATION
Enough air usually will be blown through an
aboveground shelter if sufficiently large openings are
provided on opposite sides and if there is any breeze.
But if the weather is warm and still and the shelter
crowded, the temperature-humidity conditions soon
can become unbearable.
Adequate natural ventilation for belowground
shelters is more difficult. Even if there isa light breeze,
not much air willmakea right-angleturnandgo downa
vertical entry, make another right-angle turn, and then
flow througha trench or othershelterpartially obscured
by people and supplies.
In cool weather, occupants' body heat will warm
the shelter air and make it lighter than the outdoor air.
Ifa chimney-like opening or vent-duct isprovided in the
ceiling, the warmed, lighterairwillflow upward and out
of the shelter, provided an adequate air-intake vent is
open near the floor. An Eskimo igloo is an excellent
example of how very small ventilation openings, skill-
fully located in the ceiling and at floor level, make it
possible in cold weather for chimney-type natural
ventilationto supplythe Icfm per person ofoutdoorair
needed to prevent exhaled carbon dioxide from be-
coming dangerously concentrated.
In warm weather, chimney-type natural ventila-
tion usually is inadequate for most high-protection-
factor shelters that are fully occupied for days. And in
hot weather, when as much as 40 cfm per occupant is
required, body-warmed shelterairisno lighterthan the
outdoor air. Chimney-type ventilation fails completely
under these conditions.54
SHELTER VENTILATION
WITHOUT FILTERS
Numerous tests have shown that the hazards from
fallout particles carried into shelters by unfiltered
ventilatingair are minorcompared to the dangersfrom
inadequate ventilation. A 1962summary of the official
standards for ventilating systems of fallout shelters
stated: "Air filters are not essential for small (family
size)shelters ... "17 More recent findings have ledto the
same conclusion for large fallout shelters. A 1973
report by the Subcommitteeon Fallout of the National
Academy of Sciences on the radioiodine inhalation
problem stated this conclusion: "The opinion of the
Subcommittee is that inhalation is far less of a threat
than ingestion[eating or drinking], and does not justify
countermeasures such as filters in the ventilating
systems of shelters."18
Recommendations such as those above real-
istically face the fact that, if we suffer a nuclear
attack, the vast majority of Americans will
have only the fallout protection given by build-
ings andsomeexpedientshelters. Consequently,
how best to use available resources must be the
primary consideration when planning for pro-
tection against the worst dangers of a nuclear
attack; relatively minor hazards mayhaveto be
accepted. For unprepared people, inhalation of
fallout particles would be a minor danger com-
pared to being forced out of a shelter because of
dangerously inadequate ventilation.
The most dangerous fallout particles are
those deposited on the ground within the first
few hours after the explosion that produces
them. Typically, these "hot" particles would be
so large and fast-falling that they would not be
carried into expedient shelters equipped with
low-velocity air intake openings, such as those
described in this book. Nor would these most
dangerous "hot" fallout particles be "sucked"
into gooseneckair-intake pipes,orotherproper-
ly designed air-intake openings of a permanent
shelter.
Formostsheltersbuiltor improvedhurried-
ly during a crisis it will be impractical to pro-
vide filtered air. The Car-aver-Trench Shelter
pictured in Fig. 6.3 points up the overriding
need for pumped air for occupants of crowded
shelters during warm or hot weather. This sim-
ple shelter provides fallout protection about
four times as effective as thatgiven by a typical
home basement. After the car was driven over
the trench, earth was shoveled into the car and
its trunk and on top ofits hood. Atone end was a
combined crawlway entrance/air intake open-
ing, at the otherend, a 1-foot-squareairexhaust
opening. Each opening was covered by a small
awning. To keep loose shieldingearth from run-
ning under the carand intothe trench, the upper
edges of 5-foot-wide strips of polyethylene film
first were attached with duct tape to the sides
and ends of the car, about 2 feet above the
ground. Then earth was piled onto the parts of
the film strips that were lying on the ground, to
secure them. Finally, earth was piled against
the vertical parts of the attached film strips.
Fig. 6.3. Pulling a Small, Stick-Frame KAP to
Keep Temperatures Endurable for Occupants ofa Car-
Over-Trench Shelter in Warm Weather. Enough air
also can be supplied with a small Directional
Fan, although more laboriously.
(Placingearth rolls - see page 150 - around the
sides of an earth-loaded car provides better,
more secure side shielding, but requires more
materials and work.)
INHALATION DANGERS
Only extremely small fallout particles can
reach the lungs. The human nose and other air
passages" ... can filter out almost all particles
10 micrometers [10 microns] [or larger] in dia-
meter, and about 95 percentofthoseexceeding5
micrometers." (See reference 6, page 599.) Five
micrometers equal 5 millionths of a meter, or 5
thousandths of a millimeter.
Using a dust mask or breathing through
cloth would be helpful to keep from inhaling
larger "hot" fallout particles which may cause
beta burns in noses, sinuses, and bronchial
tubes. Many such retained particles may be
swallowedwhenclearedfrom one's airpassage-
ways by the body'snatural protectiveprocesses.
As shown below in Fig. 6.4, a relatively
"large" particle - 40 microns (40 um) in dia-
meter, spherical, and with the sand-likedensity
of most fallout particles - falls about 1300 feet
in 8 hours. (A dark-colored particle 40 microns
in diameter is about as small a speck as most
people can see with the naked eye.) Most 40-
J1. m-diameter fallout particles would take a55
ONE MEGATON
RADIUS =5.1
MILES
120
I/O
100
90
60
70
>-
'"'" 60......
0
tJ) 500
Z<l
tJ)
40=>0J:
>- 30
==>-J: 20C>
<;j
J: 10
0
TWENTY MEGATONS
RADIUS OF STABILIZED CLOUD =20 MILES
22
21
20
19
IB
17
16
15
14
13
12
II
10
AVERAGE 9HEIGHT OF BOTTOM
OF STRATOSPHERE__ a tJ)
TROPOSPHERE 7 '"..J
6 ~
5 :<:
4 ~
:I:
3 C>
2 '":I:
0
Fig. 6.4. Stabilized Radioactive Fallout Clouds Shown a Few Minutes After the Explosions, with
distances that spherical fallout particles having diameters of 40,50, and 100 microns fall in 8 hours.e
few days to fall from the cloud ofa one-megaton
explosion down far enough into the troposphere
to be occasionally scavenged and promptly
broughtto earth by rain or snow while still very
radioactive. In 1987, however, most of the thou-
sands of deployed Soviet ICBM warheads are
550 kilotons or smaller. (See Jane's Weapon SI'S-
[ems. /987-88.) The stabilized clouds of such
explosions would be mostly in the troposphere,
and some of even the tiniest particles - those
small enough to be breathed into one's lungs -
would be promptly scavenged and deposited in
scattered "hot spots." Fortunately, most of the
very small and tiniest fallout particles would
not be deposited for days to months, by which
time radioactive decay would have made them
much lessdangerous. Breathingtiny radioactive
particles into one's lungs would constitute a
minor health hazard compared to otherdangers
that would afflict an unprepared people sub-
jected to a large scale nuclear attack.
SCAVENGING OF RADIOACTIVE
PARTICLES
Scavenging is most effective below about
30,000 feet, the maximum height of most rain
and snow clouds. See Fig. 6.4. Because the
Soviets have deployed thousands of ICBMs
with warheads of "only" 100 to 550 kilotons,
Americans face increased dangers from very
radioactive particles scavenged by rain-outs or
snow-outs. The resultant "hot spots" of fallout
heavy enough to kill unsheltered people in a
few weeks could be scattered even hundreds of
miles downwind from areas of multiple explo-
sions, especially missile fields. PrudentAmeri-
cans, even those living several hundred miles
from important targets, whenever practical
should equiptheir shelters with adequate venti-
lating pumps and dust filters.
This potential dangerfrom extremely small
fallout particles will be worsened if the United
States deploys mobile ICBMs such as Midget-
man, probablyon large military reservations in
the West. (The Soviet Union already has mobile
ICBMs in its nuclear forces.) In the event of a
Sovietattack, ourhard-to-targetmobile missiles
probably would be subjected to a barrage of
relatively small warheads air-bursted so as to
blanket their deployment areas. The resultant
large clouds of extremely small radioactive
particles in the troposphere usually would be
blown eastward, and resultantlife-endangering
"hot spots" from rain-outs and/or snow-outs
could be scattered clear to the Atlantic coast.
Fortunately, even in many expedient shel-
ters completed in a few days, filtered air can be
provided by using a homemade KAP to pump
airthrough furnace or air-conditionerfilters, as
described in the last section of Appendix B. To
learn how you can supply a shelter at low cost
with air so well filtered that essentially all
extremely small fallout particles and infective
aerosols are removed, see Appendix E, How To
Make a Homemade Plywood Double-Action
Piston Pump and Filter.These worsening potential dangers from
extremely small "hot" fallout particles brought
promptly to earth by scavenging are not likely
to endanger nearly as many Americans' lives
as would24-hourfalloutof much largerparticles
from surface and near-surface explosions. Pro-
viding enough outdoor air to shelters, rather
than filtered air. will continue to deserve first
priority.
STOPPING OR RESTRICTING
SHELTER VENTILATION
When instrument readings or observations
show that heavy fallout has begun to be de-
posited,shelteroccupantsshoulddecide whether
to restrict or stop ventilation. If it is windy
outside, even some sand-like fallout particles
may be blown into a shelter with large ventila-
tion openings. However, ventilation should not
be restricted long enough to cause weaker oc-
cupants to be on the verge of collapse from
overheating, or to result in headaches from
exhaled carbon dioxide.
If a house is burning dangerously close to a
separate, earth-covered shelter, closing the shelter's
ventilation openings for an hour or two usually will
prevent the entry of dangerous concentrations of
carbon monoxide. carbon dioxide, or smoke. (Most
houses willburn to the ground in lessthan two hours.)
When an attack isexpected. a shelter, occupied
or soon to be occupied, should be kept as cool as
practical by pumping large volumes of outdoor
air through it when the outdoor air is cooler
than the shelter air. This also willassure that the air
is fresh and low in exhaled carbon dioxide. Then, if a
.need arises to stop or restrict ventilation, the sheltercan
beclosed for longer than could bedone safelyotherwise.
VENTILATION/COOLING OF
PERMANENT SHELTERS
A permanent family fallout shelter, built at
moderate cost before a crisis. should have a
ventilation system that can supply adequate
volumes of either filtered or unfiltered air.
pumped in through an air-intake pipe and out
through an air-exhaust pipe. Provision also
should be made for the grim possibility that
fallout could be so heavy that a shelter might
have to be occupied for weeks, orevenpart-time
for months. A smallormedium-sized permanent
shelter should be designed so that most of the
time after an attack itcan have adequate natural
ventilationthroughits entryway andemergency
exit. During hot spells, forced ventilation
through these same large air passageways
should be provided by using a homemade KAP.
This manual air pump, described in Appendix
B, can force large volumes of air through low-
resistance openings with minimum effort.
Ways to ventilate and cool permanent shel-
ters are described in Chapter 17, "Permanent
Family Fallout Shelters for Dual Use," and in
AppendixE, "Howto Makeand Use a Homemade
PlywoodDouble-ActionPistonPumpandFilter."
WARNING:MANYOFFICIALINSTRUCTIONS
FOR BUILDING AND VENTILATING
SHELTERS ARE LIFE-ENDANGERING
Thereaderis advisednotto readthis section
if pressed for time during a crisis, unless he is
consideringbuildinganexpedientorpermanent
shelter described in an official civil defense
publication.
Because of the worldwide extreme fear of
radiation, civil defense specialists who prepare
official self-help instructions for building
shelters have made radiation protection their
overriding objective. Apparently the men in
Moscow and Washington who decide what
shelter-buildingandshelter-ventilatinginstruc-
tions their fellow citizens receive - especially
instructions for building and improving ex-
pedient shelters-do not understand the ven-
tilationrequirementsformaintainingendurable
temperature/humidity conditions in crowded
shelters. It must be remembered that shelters
may have to be occupied continuously for days
in warm or hot weather.
Russian small expedient shelters are even
more dangerously under-ventilated than are
most of their American counterparts, and can
serve to illustrate similar ventilation deficien-
ciesof American shelters. Figure6.5 is a Russian
drawing(with itscaptiontranslated)ofa "Wood-
EarthShelter" in a Sovietself-helpcivildefense
booklet, "Anti-Radiation Shelters in Rural
Areas." This booklet, published in a 200,000-
copy edition, includes illustrated instructions
for building 20 different types of expedient
shelters. All20ofthese sheltershavedangerous-
ly inadequate natural ventilation, and none of
them have air pumps. Note that this high-
protection-factor, covered-trench shelter de-
pends on air flowing down through its "Dust
FilterwithStrawPacking(hay)" andoutthrough
its small "Exhaust Duct with Damper."
As partofOak Ridge NationalLaboratory's
participation inDefenseNuclearAgency's "Dice
Throw" 1978 blasttest, I builttwoRussianPole-
Covered Trench Shelters. These were like the
shelter shown in Fig. 6.5, except that each
lacked a trapdoor and filter. As anticipated, so
little air flowed through these essentially dead-
ended test shelters that temperatures soon be-
came unbearable.Fig. 6.5. Figure 20. Wood-Earth Shelter without Lining of the Walls for Clay Soils, 10
Occupants: 1 - Trap Door; 2 - Dust Filter with a Straw Packing (hay); 3 - Earth Cover
60-80 cm thick; 4 - Roofing made of Poles; 5 -Exhaust Duct with Damper; 6 - Curtain
made of TightlyWoven Cloth;7-Removable Containerfor Wastes;8-WaterCollecting
Sump.
NOTE: Bill of materials is: Rough Lumber, 2.7 cubic meters; Nails, 0.12 kilogram;
Wire, 0.64 kilogram; Work Requirement, 90-110 man-hours; Shielding Coef-
ficient, 250-300.
Russian earth-covered expedient fallout
sheltersarebasedonmilitarydugoutsdesigned
for brief occupancy during a conventional at-
tack. Subsequently, they were improved for
falbut protection but were made much less
habitable by Soviet civil defense specialists.
Apparently these specialists were ignorant of
ventilation requirements, and almost certainly
they did not field-test small expedient fallout
shelters for habitability. Tens of millions of
Russianshavebeentaughttobuildsuchshelters.
Once any bureaucracy issues dangerously
faulty equipment or instructions, it rarely cor-
rects them except under pressure. I have ex-
periencedthis reluctance even during wartime,
when trying to improve faulty combat equip-
ment that was causing American soldiers to
lose their lives. Continuing proofs of such bur-
eaucraticreluctancetocorrectdangerouserrors
are hundreds of thousands of potentially life-
endangering civil defense pamphlets and
booklets - especially the several editions of In
TimeofEmergency- keptnationwideinhundreds
ofcommunities,primarilyforcrisisdistribution.
Some American official instructions for
building expedient shelters have been slowly
improvedoverthedecades; thebestare givenin
the June 1985 edition of Protection in the Nuclear
Age, oneof theFederalEmergencyManagement
Agency's widely available free booklets. Yet
even in this improved edition no mention is
made of the crucial need for forced ventilation
duringwarmweather,norforexpedient, simple
means for providing pumped air. Also, in the
June 1985 edition of Protection in the Nuclear Age,
the second crawlway entry/exit of the Above-
Ground, Door-Covered Shelter (see Appendix
A.4) is replaced by a "4-6" DIA. PIPE FOR
VENTILATION," which makes this very small
shelter essentially dead-ended and thereby
eliminates adequate ventilation in warm wea-
ther. With only a 6-inch-diameter air-exhaust
opening, not nearly enough air can flow
naturallyinwarmweatherthroughthiscrowded
shelter's room (only about 39 inches wide by 34
inches high). As proved by habitability tests in
Florida and elsewhere, a KAP or Directional
Fan must be used, even with two crawlway
entry/exits.The essential second crawlway entry/exit
of the Aboveground Door-Covered Shelter was
eliminatedastheresultof a recommendationby
a contractorfor FEMAchargedwithfield testing
and evaluatingexpedient shelters, and improv-
ing abbreviated shelter-building instructions.
No habitability tests were required. So the
contractorconcludedinhis 1978reporttoFEMA
that the second entry/exitshould be eliminated
because "The building of entries is time con-
suming and with this small a shelter a second
entry is really not justified."
In peacetime, bureaucracies of all nations
tend to divide up responsibilities between
specialistsandto promotemeansbywhichnon-
prestigious wartime problems can apparently
be solved with the least expense and work.
DIRECTIONAL FANNING
TO VENTILATE SHELTERS
The Directional Fanning instructions on .
the following two pages may save more lives
than any other instructions given in this book
for a homemakeable survival item. I regretthat
no one rediscovered this premechanization,
simple, yet effective way of manually pumping
air until after the original Nuclear War Survival
Skills was published.
In 1980,Dr. William Olsen,a NASAresearch
engineer long concerned with improving self-
help civil defense, rediscovered one kind of
Directional Fanning. Since then, with the as-
sistance of able Americans and others, I have
designed andtested severaltypes of Directional
Fans. I have field-tested and repeatedly im-
provedthe instructionstoenableaveragepeople
to quickly learn how to make and use such fans
effectively.
The greatadvantageofDirectionalFanning
is that almost anyone who is given the field-
tested instructions can quickly make and use
one of these simple fans. Only very widely
available materials are needed. The main dis-
advantage is thatDirectionalFanningis a more
laborious way to ventilate a shelter than using
KAPs, as described in detail in Appendix B.
Americans are not likely to receive Direc-
tional Fanning instructions from the Federal
Emergency ManagementAgency. FEMA'spre-
decessors, the Office of Civil Defense and the
Defense Civil Preparedness Agency, were un-
able to get the millions of dollars necessary to
buy factory-made KAPs and other manual air
pumps to ventilate officially.designated fallout
shelters, and FEMA has avoided shelter venti-
lating controversies. No widely available offi-
cialAmericanpublicationincludes instructions
for making and using any expedient air-
pumping device.
ThankstoCongressmanIkeSkelton,Demo-
crat of Missouri and strong civil defense
advocate, in 1981 I was able to demonstrate
Directional Fanning to Louis Giuffrida, at that
time the Director of FEMA. I gave Directional
Fans to the FEMA specialists concerned with
shelter ventilation, all of whom have since left
FEMA. To date, although Directional Fanning
instructions have been reproduced in three pri-
vate civil defense publications, and some 600
copies of a metric version of the instructions
were distributedto British civil defense profes-
sionalsatthe 1984AnnualStudyof CivilDefence
and Emergency Planning Officers, FEMA has
not even evaluated Directional Fanning.
In contrast, in 1981 I gave copies ofinstruc-
tions for both KAPs and Directional Fans to Dr.
Yin Zhi-shu, the Director of the People's Repu-
blic of China's National Research and Design
Institute of Civil Defense - and the next day he
started evaluating these simple devices. (At
that time I was traveling extensively in China
as an official guest, exchanging civil defense
information.) Dr. Yin, who heads all Chinese
civil defense research and development, went
with his top ventilation and shelter design
specialis.ts to a furniture factory in Beijing.
There I watched workmen quickly build both a
large and a small KAP, and also Directional
Fans. Then Dr. Yin and his specialists began
using their air-velocity meters to measure the
volumes of air that these simple devices could
pump. On the following days I participated in
more ventilation tests using KAPs and Direc-
tional Fans in tunnel blast shelters in Beijing
and in the port city of Dalien.
While watching these top Chinese civil
defense professionals make and test KAPs and
Directional Fans, I kept thinking: "This is the
way Thomas Edison and Henry Ford would
have evaluatedsimpledevicesof possible great
importance to millions."
The reader is urged to keep the following
two pages of Directional Fanning instructions
ready for reproduction in a crisis. The sections
on the small 2-handled Directional Fan and the
large 1-Man Fan will be the most useful to
unprepared people. Ventilation by pairs of men
using Bedsheet Fans is an effective method for
forcing very large volumes of outdoor air
through tunnels, corridors and mines with ceil-
ings at least 9 feet high - provided they have
two large openings. However, this method re-
quires organization and discipline.DIRECTIONAL FANNING TO VENTILATE SHELTERS
A. DIRECTIONAL FANNING TO VENTILATE AND COOL
SMALLER SHELTERS
1
DOORWAY
UNTIL ITS 8LADE ALMOST
TOUCI'lES YOUR 8ELLY, THEN
IMMEOIATELY 8EGIN THE
HEXT POWEll: 8TltOX[ IY
QUICXL Y RAISING THE FAN
UNTIL THE FAN 19
ALMOST HORIZONTAL
-I' WlTHDIUIiW THE FAN':::;:)
mEND OF POWER STROkE
'AN
, _ __ ....- ~-L I:I~~
~IR~~~~~~TAO:CE:~~AA-:-~r
DUCT 24 IN. HIGH I( 20 _ .!'
IN. WIDE --.,. ~
..... ......-
'F:::FULLYFAN(PUSHlA<;;) ~~
SLUG OF AIR INTO THE DUCT- ! r- .
EXTENDING YOUR ARIIlS FULLY
WEND OF FIRST l'<ALF
OF POWfA STROKE
Have two or more occupants sitting
inside the shelter each use a fan of the
size described above to fan the air so
as to increase its velocity inthe direction
in which air already is flowing through
the shelter. Such Directional Fanning
is especially effective in increasing the
air flow through small, narrow shelters.
ill, ill After a slight pause,
leisurely withdraw the almost horizontal
fan until the bottom of its blade almost
touches your stomach -- preparatory
to the next power stroke.
To increase the flow of air
through a shelter, while fanning
the occupants:
With one or more DirectionalFans, air inside a shelter can be distribute
effectively and the occupants cooled. Also, if during the time of maximui
fallout dose rate the occupants get close together in the most protective pa
of the shelter, they often will get unbearably hot unless fanned.
To fan air out through an air-exhaust opening, sit facing the opening wit
your elbows about 4 inches lowerthan the bottomoftheopening. Then com
1, 2, 3 while you:
OJ Quickly raise the fan to a
vertical position close in front of your
face and immediately fan (push) a
slug of air into the opening - ending
the power stroke with your arms fully
extended and with the fan almost
horizontal and out of the way of air
that was "sucked" behind the fan and
is still flowing outthrough the opening.
To avoid higher radiation exposures
near openings, build an essentially
airtight partition across the shelter
room, with a 24-inch-high x 20-inch-
wide hole in it through whichto fan. By
fanning through a 24 x 20-inch hole in
a cardboard partition built across a doorway inside aU-shaped perrnanei
trench shelter 76 feet long, the air flow was increased by an average of :32
cubic feet per minute.
To ventilate larger basements, big
covered trenches, and otherlarge shel-
ters lacking adequate ventilation, use
one or more large loman fans. See
sketch. Note that the 20 x 30-inch fan
blade is made like a 2-stick kite, and
that the upper end of the longer dia-
gonal stick serves as a 10-inch handle.
The model illustrated is made of 2
nominal 1 x 2-inch boards, one 46
inches long and the other 35 inches
long. These boards are connected at a
point 17y, inches from their lower
ends, first with a single clinched nail,
and then by being tied securely. The
edges ofthe handle are rounded smooth.
The blade frame is covered on
both sides with strong bedsheet cloth,
that is wrapped around and secured to
the strong cordsor wires tiedtonotches
cut in the boards (or sticks) near the 4
corners of the blade. (If cord or wire is
not available, 4 2-inch-wide strips of
strong cloth, slightly twisted, serve
well.)
B. DIRECTIONAL FANNING TO VENTILATE AND COO
LARGER SHELTERS
1. With a Large I-Man Fan
BLADE
~14
i
I
J
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I(/) J I
W(O I I
~~- : :- J I
C\l ur~ -------------~.
lf
C\l ~ ~
(Oct
::I:
rr
A 2-Handled Directional Fan of
the size illustrated is less tiring to use
and requires less manual dexterity
than does a I-handled fan with the
same size blade. With this small 2-
handled fan you quite easily can force
about 300 cubic feet per minute (300
efm)of outdoorair through a crowded
trench or basement shelter. This is
enough air for up to 9 adults crowded
into a small shelter in extremely hot.
humid weather, and enough for about
100 people in cold weather. By fanning
vigorously, 500 to 600 cubic feet per
minute have been forced through a
small covered-trench shelter.
To make a durable 2-handled fan, first make its frame oufof2 sticks each
14 inches long and 2 sticks each 22 inches long. See sketch. To strengthen
the corners, overlap the sticks about one-half inch, as shown.
When using sticks cut from a tree, select ones with diameters of about %
inch, and make shallow notches in all 4 sticks before tying together the 4
corners of the blade. If you do not have strong string, use %-inch-wide strips
of bedsheet cloth, or other strong cloth, slightly twisted.
If using sawed sticks, be sure to use none smaller than b x31< inch in cross
section. If you have very small nails or brads, use only one to connect each
corner; then tie each corner securely. To prevent possible blistering of
hands, wrap cloth around the fan handles, or wear gloves.
To cover the fan's blade, any strong, light fabric, such as bedsheet cloth,
serves welLIfyou are going to sew on the cloth, first cut a 26 x30-inch piece.
Wrap the 30-inch width smoothly crosswise around the frame, aftercutting4
notches in the cloth's corners, so that the tied-together parts of the sticks will
not be covered. Pin or tape the cloth to make a smooth blade; finally sew
securely. (If waterproof construction adhesive is available, a smaller piece of
cloth can be used and the blade can be covered ill a very few minutes.)
If time and/or materials are very limited, make a fanwith its blade
merely a piece ofcloth connecting two 22-inch-long sticks, This very
simple fan is reasonably effective, although tiring to use.
Cardboard covering a blade is likely to become damp and fragile in the
humid air of a crowded shelter. Very light sheetmetalmakes a good fan blade
and requires only 2 sticks. A blade of 'I4-inch plywood is too heavy.
If no sticks are available, a double thickness of heavy, stiff cardboard 22
inches long by 14 inches wide will pump almost as much air if used as a
handleless fan. The pieces should be securely tied or taped together. If
waterproof tape is available, cover the parts that you will grip with sweaty
hands, thus preventing dampening and softening the cardboard.
For maximum ventilation, the air-intake opening of a shelter should be at
least as large as its air-exhaust opening. (If the air-exhaust opening of your
small shelter is much larger than that shown in the sketches, block part of it
off to reduce it to approximately this 24-inch-high by 20-inch-wide size, for
more effective use with this fan.) The air should be fanned out of the shelter
in the direction in which the air is naturally flowing. Formaximum ventilation
rate, fan about 40 strokes per minute.
Directional Fanning is the simplest way to force enough outdoor air
through typical basement; trench, and other expedient shelters to maintain
endurable conditions, even in extremely hot, humid weather.
During a worsening nuclear crisis most unprepared citizens probably
will not have the time and/or materials needed to make a KAP or other
efficient shelter-ventilating pump - even if they have the instructions. In
contrast. tests with average citizens have indicated that if they have
instructions for making and using Directional Fans and if there are a few
hours of warning time before the attack, then the majority will be able to
ventilate all of their expedient shelters, except some of the largest.
The principal disadvantage of Directional Fans is that they are more
laborious tooperate than are KAPs, thatare manually powered, pendulum-
like air pumps that conserve energy.60
A durable but laboriously heavy fan can be made in a few minutes using a
20 x 30-inch piece of I/,-inch plywood nailed to a single 46-inch-Iong, 1 x 2-
inch hoard. Or use a single round stick about 11"inches in diameter, flattened
on one side.
A fan with its blade made of two sheets of very heavy cardboard tied on
both sides of a 1 x 2-inch board is decidedly effective when dry. However,
typical cardboard will become soft and worthless in most crowded, long-
occupied, humid shelters.
To fan directionally, it is best to stand just outside and to one side of a
doorway. so that your body does not obstruct the air flow. Preferably stand
opposite and facing the open door, which should be secured open and
perpendicular to its doorway. Hold the fan like a golf club and swing it with
your arms extended. Then slowly count 1, 2 while you:
W Make the power stroke with the fan bladebroadside until the end of
the stroke, when you quickly turn it 90 degrees.
[i] Make the pendulum-like return stroke with the fan blade kept
edgewise ("feathered") to the air flow until the end, when you quickly turn it
90 degrees. preparatory to making the next power stroke.
To pump more air. block off the upper part of the doorway with cloth,
cardboard. plywood. etc., to prevent air from flowing back in the wrong
direction through the upper part of the doorway. See sketch on preceding
page.
Whenever practical, directionally fan the air in the same direction that
the air is naturally flowing through the shelter. More air usually can be
pumped through a shelter if the fan is used to force air out through the air-
exhaust opening. This reduces the air pressure inside the shelter and causes
fresh outdoor air to be "sucked" into the shelter through the air-intake
doorway, or through other large air-intake openings. Thus with one fan 1,000
cubic feet per minute can be pumped through a fully occupied shelter. This is
enough outdoor air - if it is properly distributed within the shelter - to
maintain tolerable conditions for weeks for 25 occupants during extremely
hot weather, and for up to about 300 occupants during cold weather.
To ventilate and cool a room having only one doorway and no other
opening, do not block off any part of the doorway. Ifair is fanned into such a
room through the lowerpart of its completelyopendoorway, thenairwillflow
back out of the room through the upper part of the doorway. However, this
pumps much less air than when a separate, large air-exhaust opening is
provided.
To increase the flow of outdoor air through a tunnel-shelter, several
fanners equallyspaced alongits length should each fan in the directionofthe
natural air flow. This procedure was first proved practical during a 1981
ventilation test that Cresson H. Kearny participated in with Chinese civil
defense officials in the port city of Dalien. In this test 5 fanners. each with a
fan of approximately the size illustrated, forced air from the outdoors
through a 395-footsection between two opened entrancesofa typical Chinese
tunnel-shelter. The air flow was increased from a natural flow of 290 cubic
feet per minute to 3,680cubic feet per minute. The 5excellent Chinese fans
each had a blade madeofa pieceof 3 mm (approx. Ysinch)plywood nailed toa
single board.
With many more pairs of Bedsheet Fanners working, enough air for at
least 10,000 occupants could be "sucked" intothis mine throughone of its 17
x 20-foot portals, fanned down a corridor to the far "dead end" of the mine,
then fanned through a cross corridor, and finally fanned back outthrough the
corridor that has the second truck-sized portal at its outer end.
A pair of pre-mechanization coal miners produced a directed airflow by
holding a piece of canvas vertically between them while they quickly walked
a short ways in the direction ofthe desired airflow; they walked back with the
canvas held horizontally between them. Then they repeated.
1. No installation is needed, thus saving working time and materials for
making habitable shelters hurriedly built or upgraded during a crisis.
2. Directional Fans enable shelter occupants to quickly reverse the
direction of air flow through their shelter when outdoor wind changes cause
the direction of natural air flow to be reversed.
3. Four or more Directional Fans when used to circulate air within a
shelterroom can serve like air ducts, while simultaneously fanning occupants.
4. Directional Fans are very unlikely to be damaged by blast effects
severe enough to wreck bladed fans or other fixed ventilation devices placed
at or near air-intake or air-exhaust openings, but not severe enough to injure
shelter occupants.
C. ADDITIONAL ADVANTAGES OF DIRECTIONAL FANS
CHANGE HAND
POSITIONS
WHILE MOVING FAN
HORIZONTALLY BACK
TO STARTING
POSITION
The practicality of using Bedsheet Fans to ventilate some very large
mines or caves having 2 or more large openings was proved by tests with
members of the Citizens Preparedness Group of GreaterKansas City. These
tests were conducted in 1982 nearKansas CIty in a huge limestone mine that
has a ceiling averaging about 17 feet high, corridors about 35 feet wide,
columns of unexcavated rock about 15 feet square, and over 1,000,000
square feet of level, dry floor space. The airinside is"dead", remarkably still,
because the only openings are two truck-sized portals on one side of the
mine. Five pairs of Bedsheet Fanners, spaced about 75 feet apart down a
corridor, after fanning for several minutes produced a measured air flow of
approximately 100.000 cubic feet per minute through this part of this
corridor!
2. With a Bedsheet Fan
l.'se a 2-man Bedsheet Fan to force thousands of cubic feet per minute of
outdoor air through a tunnel or long corridor having at least a 9-foot ceiling
and a large opening at each end. The most practical design tested was made
from a strong double bedsheet cut down to 6-foot width, with the wide hem at
its head-end left unchanged and with a similar-sized hem sewn in its opposite
end. to give a finished lengthof6 feet. A6-foot-Iong, nominal 1x2-inch board
(or an approximately 11;, inch diameter stick) was secured inside each end
hem of various models with waterproof construction adhesive, or with tacks,
or bv tying. Before a board was inserted, its edges were rounded. Round
sticks were smoothed.
Two persons preparing to use a Bedsheet Fan (see sketch) should stand
facing each other. at right angles to the desired direction of air flow, with the
cloth extended horizontally between them. Each fanner should grip his stick
with one hand near its "downwind" end and with his other hand near its
center.
A pairof Directional Fanners get ready to make a power stroke by leaning
in the upwind direction. as illustrated. Then the pair of fanners should count
1, 2. 3 while they:
IT] Make the power stroke by rapidly sweeping their sticks and the
attached cloth in an arc. until they are leaning in the downwind direction and
the sticks and cloth are again horizontal. See sketch.
OJ, W Hold the sticks and cloth horizontal (to permit air that was
"sucked" behind the cloth to continue flowing in the desired direction) while
leisurely moving the Bedsheet Fan back to the starting position. During this
move the fanners change hands, as illustrated. (Note that what was the upper
side of the fan at the beginning of the power stroke now has become the lower
side. I
Two men thus fanning vigorously produced a net air flow of 5,500 cubic
feet per minute through an empty school corridor that is 8 feet wide, has a 9-
foot ceiling. and is 194 feet long. The doors at both ends were open. To
adequately ventilate and cool people crowded into a long tunnel in hot
weather. a pair of Bedsheet Fanners should be positioned about every 100
feet along its length.
,-,~ [I]LLJSTARTING ~----
POSITIONChapter 7
Protection Against Fires and Carbon Monoxide
RELATIVE DANGERS
Fire and itsconsequences probably would be the
third-ranking danger to unprepared Americans
subjected to a massive nuclear attack. Direct blast
effects would be first, covering a large fraction of
densely populated areas and killing far more people.
Considerably fewer fatalities seem likely to result
from the second-ranking danger, fallout radiation.
THE FACTS ABOUT FIRE HAZARDS
Firestorms would endanger relatively few
Americans; only the older parts of a few American
cities have buildings close enough together, over a
large enough area, to fuel this type of conflagration.
Such fires have not occurred in cities where less than
about 30% of a large area was covered with
buildings."
In the blast area of Hiroshima, a terrifying fire
storm thatburned almost all buildings withinan area
of about 4.4 square miles resulted from many fires
being ignited almost simultaneously. Many were
caused by heat radiation from the fireball. Even more
fires were due to secondary effects of the blast, such
as the overturning of stoves. The buildingscontained
much wood and other combustible materials. The
whole area burned like a tremendous bonfire; strong
winds that blew in from all directions replaced the
huge volumes of hot air that rose skyward from the
intense fires.
Lack of oxygen is not a hazard to occupants of
shelters in or near burning buildings or to those in
shelters that are closed tightly to prevent the entry of
smoke or fallout. Carbon monoxide, toxic smoke
from fires, or high concentrations of carbon dioxide
from shelter occupants' exhaled breaths would kill
occupants before they suffered seriously from lack of
oxygen.
FIRES IGNITED BY HEAT RADIATION
Figure 7.1 shows a wood-frame house after it
was heated for one second by heat radiation from a
smallnuclearweaponexploded in a Nevada test. This
test house had no furnishings, but the heat was
intense enough to have ignited exposed upholstery,
curtains, bedding, papers, etc. in a typical home.
Heat radiation. will set fire to easily ignitable
materials (dry newspapers, thin dark fabrics, dry
leaves and dry grass) in about the same extensive
areas over which blast causes moderate damage to
frame houses. The blast wave and high-speed blast
winds will blowout many flames. However, tests
have shown that fire will continue to smolder within
some materials such as upholstery and dry rotted
.wood, and after a while it often will burst into flame
and will spread. The burning automobile pictured in
Fig. 7.2 is an example of such ignition beyond the
range of severe blast damage.
The number of fires started by heat radiation in
areas where blast is not severe can be reduced by
whitewashing the insides of window panes and by
removing flammable materials from places in and
around houses where heat radiation could reach
them. Also, occupants of shelters in some homes that
would be only slightly damaged by blast could move
quickly to extinguish small fires and throw out
smoldering upholstered articles before fallout is
deposited.Fig. 7.1. Heat radiation charred the paint on this house, which had been painted white to reflect heat rays.
The charring instantaneously produced the smoke. However, precautions had been taken to preventthis typical
U.S. house from being destroyed by fire, because the test was made to enable engineers to study the effects of
blast, rather than fire. The house wasdemolished by the 5-psi overpressure blast that struck seconds later, but it
did not burn.
Fig. 7.2. Thermal radiation from a nuclear explosion enteredthe carabove through itsclosed windows and
ignited the upholstery. The windows wereblown out bythe blast afewseconds later. However, the explosion was
at such a distance that the blast wave was not severe enough to dent the car body.Earth-covered shelters can be protected against
heat radiation from nuclear explosions and other
causes by painting any exposed wood and other
combustible materials at shelter openings with a
thick coating of slaked lime (old-fashioned white-
wash). The World War II firebombing of Kassel was
less effective than were similar raids on other German
cities because the roof timbers of buildings had been
so treated."
Figure 7.3 illustrates the effectiveness of a thick
coating of slaked lime in protecting a rough pine
board against ignition by heat radiation. No flames
from the burning logs touched the board. (Before this
photograph was taken, the uppermost burning logs
of a vertical-sided pile were removed so that the
board could be seen clearly.)
Chinese civil defense instructions recommend
coating exposed wood with both slaked lime and
mud." If only mud is available, a coating of it
protects wood quite well. If kept damp, a mud
coating is even more effective. (Simply keeping all
exposed flammable materials damp is helpful.)
In blast areas, cloth or plastic canopies over the
openings of expedient shelters usually would be
ignited by the heat and certainly would be blown
away by even moderate blastwinds. Ifextra canopies
and stakes could be made and kept inside the shelter,
these replacements could be quickly erected after
blast winds subside and before fallout begins-at
least 15 minutes after the explosion. If no spare
canopies were available, it would be best to keep the
available canopies and their stakes inside the shelter,
if it were not raining.
FOREST AND BRUSH FIRES
Unless forests or brushy areas are dry, it is
difficult to start even scatteredfires. Dangerous mass
fires would be'unlikely, except in blast areas where
the heat radiation would be very intense. However,
people building a shelter would do well to select a
shelter site at least as far away from trees as the height
of the tallest tree that could fall on the shelter-be-
cause of fire and smoke hazards in dry weather, and
because digginga shelteramongtree roots isdifficult.
Fig. 7.3. Heat radiation had ignited the flaming half of the board on the ground, while the half nearthe
shovel-painted white with a thick coating of slaked lime-had not even begun to smoke.CAUSES OF FIRE
Figure 7.4 pictures the same house shown in Fig.
7.1 after it had been struck by the blast effects of a
small nuclear test explosion at the 5-psi overpressure
range. (Ifthe house had been hit by the blasteffects of
a multimegaton weapon, with longer-lasting blast
winds, it would have been wrecked about as
completely at the 3-psi overpressure range. At the
3-psi overpressure range.'the blast winds from an
explosion 1000times as powerful as the Nevada test
explosion that wrecked this house would blow 10
times as long. This longer-duration, 100-mph blast
wind would increase the damage done by the blast
wave. The 3-psi overpressure range from a 20-
megaton surface burst is about 10 miles from the
center of the crater, and from it one-megaton surface
burst, about 4 miles.")
If the blast-wrecked house shown in the
illustration had had a furnace in operation when it
was demolished, the chances of its being.set on fire
would have been high. In Hiroshima many ofthe first
fires resulted from secondary effects of blast,
especially the overturning of stoves, and not from
heat radiation. Although the air burst produced no
fallout, firefighters from undamaged, nearby com-
munities were unable to reach most of the burning
areas because of blast debris blocking the roads.
Later they were kept from burning areas by the
intense heat. Some water mains were broken, which
made water unavailable for firefighting in certain
areas.
In the event of an attack on the United States
employing many surface bursts, fallout would
prevent firefighting for days to weeks in a large part
of the most populated regions.
The basements of many substantial buildings
will withstand 5-psi blast effects and can prevent
occupants from suffering serious injuries from blast.
Most home basements can be reinforced with stout
boards and posts so as to give good protection
against blast effects up to considerably. hig~er than
5 psi. But considering the dangers of fires III prob-
able blast areas, it is safer to build an earth-covered
shelter well removed from buildings than it is to
seek protection in shelters inside buildings.
CARBON MONOXIDE AND TOXIC SMOKE
If an undamaged building is burning, people
inside may be killed by carbon monoxide, toxic
smoke, or fiery-hot air. Tests have shown that even
fast-burning, rubble-free fires produce very high
concentrations of carbon monoxide. If large-scale
fires are burningneara shelter, the dangers from both
carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide may continue
for as long as 11/2 hoursafterignition.fTherefore, the
ventilation pipes or openings of a shelter should not
be placed close to a building that might be expected
to burn.
In the smoldering rubble of a large test fire, after
24 hours the carbon monoxide concentration was
still more than I% and the air temperature was
Fig. 7.4. Unburned wreckage of the same two-story, wood.-frame house pictured in Fig. 7.1 after being
wrecked by the 5-psi blast effects of a small nuclear test explosion,1900°F. A carbon monoxide concentration of only
0.08% (8 parts CO in 10,000 parts of air) will cause
headache, dizziness, and nausea in 45 minutes, and
total collapse in 2 hours.
Realization of carbon monoxide dangers to
persons in simple fallout shelters and basements may
have led the writers of Soviet civil defense publica-
tions to define the "zone of total destruction" as the
blast areas where the overpressure- exceeds 7 psi and
"residential and industrial buildings are completely
destroyed ... the rubble is scattered and covers the
burning structures," and "As a result the rubble only
smolders, and fires as such do not occur.,,23
Smoldering fires produce more carbon monoxide
than do fiercely burning fires. Whether or not the
occupants of basement shelters survive the direct
blast effects is of little practical importance in those
blast areas where the rubble overhead burns or
smolders. So in the "zone of complete destruction,"
Russian rescue brigades _plan to concentrate on
saving persons trapped inside excellent blast shelters
by the rubble.
About 135,000 Germans lost their lives in the
tragic city of Dresden during three days offirebomb
raids. Most casualties were caused by the inhalation
of hot gases and by carbon monoxide and smoke
poisoning.i" Germans learned that when these
dangers were threatening an air raid shelter, the
occupants' best chance ofsurvivalwas to run outside,
even if the bombs were still falling. But in a nuclear
war the fanout dose rate may be so high that the
occupants of a shelter threatened by smoke and
carbon monoxide might suffer a more certain and
worse death by going outside. Instead, if they know
from instrument readings and their calculations that
they probably would receive a fatal dose before they
could reach another shelter, the occupants should
close all openings as tightly as possible. With luck,
carbon monoxide in deadly concentrations would
not reach them, nor would they be overcome by heat
or their own respiratory carbon dioxide before the
fire dangers ended.
Dr. A.Broido, a leading experimenter with fires
and their associated dangers, reached this conclu-
sion: "If I were building a fallout shelter I would
spend a few extra dollars to build it in my backyard
rather than in my basement, locating the intake vent
as far as possible from any combustible material. In
such a shelter I would expect to survive anything
except the close-in blast effects.,,22
This advice also applies to expedient shelters
built during a crisis.Chapter 8
Water
WATER AND SALT REQUIREMENTS
Painful thirst has been experienced by very few
Americans. We take for granted that we will always
have enough water to drink. Most of us think of
"food and water" in that order, when we think of.
survival essentials that should be stored. But if
unprepared citizens were confined in a shelter by
heavy fallout, they soon would realize that they
should have given first priority to storing adequate
water.
For the kidneys to eliminate waste products
effectively, the average person needs to drink enough
water so that he urinates at least one pint each day.
(When water is not limited, most people drink
enough to urinate 2 pints. Additional water is lost in
perspiration, exhaled breath, and excrement.) Under
cool conditions, a personcouldsurvive for weeks on 3
pints of water a day-if he eats but little food and if
that food islow in protein. Coolconditions, however,
would be the exception in crowded belowground
shelters occupied for many days. Under such
circumstances four or five quarts of drinking water
per day are essential in very hot weather, with none
allowed for washing. For a two-week shelter stay, 15
gallons per person should be stored in or close to a
shelter. This amount usually would provide for some
water remaining after two weeks, to prevent thirst in
case fallout dangers were to continue.
In a 1962Navy shelteroccupancy test lastingtwo
weeks, 99 sailors each consumed an average of 2.4
quarts (2.3 liters) of water per day." The test was
conducted in August near Washington, D.C.; the
weather was unseasonably cool. The shelter was not
air-conditioned except during the last two days of the
test.
When one is sweating heavily and not eating
salty food, salt deficiency symptoms-s-especially
cramping-are likely to develop within a few days.
To prevent this, 6 or 8grams of salt (about 1/4oz, or 1/2
tablespoon) should be consumed daily in food and
drink. Iflittle or no food iseaten, this small dailysalt
ration should be added to drinking water. Under hot
conditions, a little salt makes water taste better.
CARRYING WATER
Most families have only a few large containers
that could be used for carrying water to a shelter and
storing it in adequate amounts for several weeks.
Polyethylene trash bags make practical expedient
water containers when used as waterproof liners
inside smaller fabric bags or pillowcases. (Plastic
bags labeled as being treated with insecticides or
odor-controlling chemicals should not be used.)
Figure 8.1 shows a teenage boy carrying over 10
gallons (more than 80 pounds) of water, well
balanced front and back for efficient packing. Each
of his two burlap bags is lined with two 20-gallon
polyethylene trash bags, one inside the other. (To
avoid possible pinhole leakage it is best to put one
waterproof bag inside another.)
To close a plastic bag of waterso that hardlyany
will leak out, first spread the top of the bag until the
two inner sides of the openingaretogether. Then fold
in the center so that the folded opening is 4
thicknesses, and smooth (see Fig. 8.2). Continue
smoothly folding in the middle until the whole
folded-up opening is .only about Ilh inches wide.
Then fold the top of the bag over on itself so the
folded-up opening points down. With a strip of cloth
or a soft cord, bind and tie the folded-over partwith a
bow knot, as illustrated.Fig. 8.1. Carrying 80 pounds of water in two
burlap bags, each lined with two larger plastic trash
bags, one inside the other..
QRNl.owG 78-7106
Fig. 8.2. Folding and tying the mouth of a
water-filled plastic bag.
For long hikes, it isbest to tie the water-holding
plastic bags so that the openings 'are higher than the
water levels inside.
To transport this type of expedient water bag in
a vehicle, tie a rope around the fabric outer bag near
its opening, so that the rope also encircles and holds
the plastic liner-bags just below their tied-shut
openings. The other end of this rope should then be
tied to some support, to keep the openings higher
than the water level.
To use two fabnc bags or pillowcases to carry a
heavy load of water contained in larger plastic liner-
bags, connect the two fabric bags as shown in Fig. 8.1.
A small pebble, a lump of earth, or a similar
object should be tied inside the opening of each bag
before the two are tied together, to hold them
securely. The bag that isto be carried in front should
have the pebble tied about 4 inches further down
from the edge of its opening than the pebble tied in
the bag to be carried in back. This keeps the pebbles
from being pressed against the carrier's shoulderbya
heavy load.
A pair of trousers with both legs tied shut at the
bottoms. can be used to carry a balanced load if
pillowcases or other fabric bags are notat hand. Such
a balanced load can be slung over the shoulder with
the body erect and less strained than if the same
weight were carried in a single bag-like pack on the
back. However, trouser legs are quite narrow and do
not provide room to carry more than a few gallons.
To prevent water from slowly leaking through
the tied-shut openings of plastic bags, the waterlevels
inside should be kept below the openings.
STORING WATER
When storing expedient water bags in a shelter,
the water levels inside should be kept below the
openings.
.Not many expedient shelters would be large
enough to store an adequate volume of water for an
occupancy lasting two or more weeks. Plastic-lined
storage pits, dug in the earth close to the shelter, are
dependable for storing large volumes of water using
cheap, compact materials. Figure 8.3 shows a
cylindrical water-storage pit dug so as to have a
diameter about two inches smaller than the inflated
ORNL-DWG 77-i0423R
WIRE HOOP TAPED
INTO FOLDED- OVER
EDGE OF 30-gol
POLYETHYLENE
TRASH BAG
(lB in. DIAM IF
FULLY EXPANDED).
DOUBLE BAGS
ARE BETTER.
Fig. 8.3. Vertical section of cylindrical water-
storage pit lined with two 30-gallon waterproof
plastic bags. This pit held about 20 gallons.diameter of the two 30-gallonpolyethylenetrash bags
lining it (one bag inside the other). Before a plastic
bag is placed in such a pit, the ends of roots should be
cut off flush to the wall with a sharp knife, and sharp
rocks should be carefully removed.
The best way to keep the upper edges of the pit-
lining bags from slipping into the pit isshown in Fig.
8.3: Make a circular wire hoop the sizeof the opening
of the bag, and tape it inside the top. In firm ground,
the upper edges of double bags have been
satisfactorily held in place simply bystickingsix large
nails through the turned-under edges of the bags and
into the firm earth.
Figure 8.3 shows how to roofand cover a water
storage pit so as to pr.otect the water. The "buried
roof" of waterproof material prevents any contami-
nation of the stored water by downward-percolating
rainwater, which could contain bacteria or small
amounts of radioactive substances from fallout. The
thick earth cover over the flexible roofing gives'
excellent blast protection, due to the earth arching
that develops under blast pressure. In a large Defense
Nuclear Agencyblasttest,a filled water-storage pit of
the size illustrated was undamaged by blast effects at
an overpressure range which could demolish the
strongest aboveground buildings (53 psi).
A simpler way to store waterisillustrated in Fig.
8.4. If the soil is so unstable that an unshored water
storage pit with vertical sides cannot be dug, the
opening of the bag (or of one bag placed inside
another) can simply be tied shut so as to minimize
leakage (see Fig. 8.4). Fill the bag with water, tie it,
and place it in the pit. Then bury it with earth to the
level of the water inside. A disadvantage of this
method is leakage through the tied-shut openingsdue
to pressure of loose earth on the bag. To lessen
leakage, leave an air space between the filled bag and
a roofing of board or sticks, so' that the weight of
earth piled on top of the roofing will not squeeze the
bag. This storage method has another disadvantage:
after the earthcoveringand the roofare removed, it is
difficult to bailout the water for use-because as
water is bailed out, the loose surrounding earth
moves inward and squeezes the bag above the
lowered water level.
Large volumes of water can be stored in plastic-
lined rectangular pits. In order to roof them with
widely available materials such as ordinary 3/4-inch
plywood or small poles, the pits should be dug no
wider than 3 feet. Figure 8.5 pictures such a pit: 8feet
Fig. 8.4. Thesetwo 30-gallonpolyethylenetrash
bags, one inside the other, held 16 gallons of water.
They were undamaged by 50-psi blast effects while
buried in dry, very light soil. The plywood roof and
the earth placed over the water bag were removed
before this picture was taken.
Fig. 8.5. Post-blast view of plastic-lined water-
storage pit undamaged at a 6.7-psi overpressure
range. This pit held about 200 gallons.
long, 27 inches wide, and 30 inches deep. It was lined
with a lO-foot-wide sheet of 4-mil polyethylene. The
edges of this plastic sheet were held in place by
placing them in shallow trenchesdug near the sides of
the pit and covering them with earth. Earth wasmounded over the plywood roof to a depth of about
30 inches, with a "buried roof" of polyethylene. The
earth cover and its "buried roof" were similar to the
pit covering illustrated by Fig. 8.3. This rectangular
pit contained about 200 gallons of water. No water
leaked out after the pit had been subjected to blast
effects severe enough to have flattened most
substantial buildings. However, rectangular pits at
higher overpressures failed, due to sidewall caving
that caused leaks.
In a subsequent blast test by Boeing Aerospace
Company, a plastic-lined water pit was undamaged at
the 200-psi overpressure range. First a rectangular
pit 4 ft. wide, 12 ft. long, and 2 ft. deep was dug.
Then inside this pit a 2 x 10 x 2-ft. water-storage
pit was dug, and lined with plastic film. After
being filled full of water, the storage pit was
coveredwith plywood, on whichwas shoveled2
ft. of earth.
Plastic garbage cans are usually watertight;
most used metal garbage cans are not. If thoroughly
cleaned and disinfected with a strong chlorine bleach
solution, watertight garbage cans can serve for
emergency water storage, as can some wastebaskets.
If new plastic film is available, it can be used as a
lining to waterproof any strong box. To lessen the
chances of the plastic being punctured, rough
containers first should be lined with fabric.
If shelter is to be taken in or near a building,
water trapped in hot water heaters and toilet flush
tanks or stored in tubs might be available after an
attack.
SIPHONING
Pouring water out of a heavy water-storage bag
is inconvenient and often results in spillage. Dipping
it out can result incontamination. Ifa tube or piece of
flexible garden hose is available, siphoning (see Fig.
8.6) isthe best way. A field-tested method isdescribed
below. To prevent the suction end of the tube from
being obstructed by contact with the plastic liner of
the bag, tape or tie a wire "protector" to the end, as
pictured later in this section.
To start siphoning, suck on the tube until
water reaches your mouth. Next fold over the
tube near its end, to keep the tube full. Lower its
closed end until it is near its position shown in
Fig. 8.6. Then release your hold on the tube, to
start siphoning.
To cut off the water, fold over the tube and
secure it shut with a rubber band or string.
Water can be siphoned from a covered water
storage pit into a belowground shelter so that the
siphon will deliver running water for weeks, if
ORNL-DWG 78·14676
i:,
"
SIPHON TU8E
Fig. 8.6. Using a tube to siphon water from a
fabric bag lined with a larger plastic bag.
necessary. The Utah family mentioned earlier
siphoned all they n'eeded of the 120 gallons of water
stored in a nearby lined pit. A field-tested method of
siphoning follows:
I. Dig the water storage pit far enough away
from the shelter so that the covering mounds will not
interfere with drainage ditches.
2. Use a flexible tube or hose which is no more
than 25 feet long. For a single family, a flexible
rubber tube with an inside diameter of 1.1 inch (such as
surgical tubing) would be best. Aflexible Ih-inch hose
of the type used with mobile homes and boats serves
well. As indicated by Fig. 8.7, the tube should be long
enough to extend from the bottom of the water pit to
within about a foot of the shelter floor.
3. Make sure that the end in the water pit will
not press against plastic and block the flow of water.
This can be avoided by (I) making and attaching a
wire "protector" to the end of the tube, as shown in
Fig. 8.8, or (2) taping or tying the end to a rock or
other object, to keep the end in the desired position.
4. Protect the tube by placing it in a trench
about 4 inches deep. This small trench is best dug
before roofing either the storage pit or the shelter. Be
sure a roof pole or board does not crush the tube.
Cover the tube with earth and tie it so that the end inI I
I
WATER STORAGE
PIT LINED WITH
PLASTIC FILM
PLASTIC OR CLOTH
OVER ROOF POLES,
BOAR DS, OR PLYWOOD
2-1/2 ft
"BURIED ROOFS"
OF PLASTIC FILM
2-1/2 ft
MAXIMUM
TUBE OR HOSE IN EARTH· -...i..S
COVERED TRENCH 4 INCHES /
DEEP
.....----- 8 TO 10 ft -----+----~
\
Fig. 8.7. Water siphoned into a belowground shelter.
Fig. 8.8. Two wire "protectors," each made of
two pieces of coathanger wire taped to a 'h-inch
flexible hose and a rubber tube. Shown on the right is
a tube closed with a rubber band to stop a siphoned
flow of water.
7. Exhale, straighten the tube, and suck again,
repeating until you feela good flow of water into your
.mouth while stillsucking. Shut off the flow by bending
the tube double before taking it out of your mouth.
8. Quickly lower the end of the tube (which is
now full of water) and place the closed end in a
container on the shelter floor. Finally, open the end
to start the siphoned flow.
9. When you have siphoned enough water, stop
the flow by bending the tube double. Keep it closed in
the doubled-over, air-tight position with a strong
rubber band or string, as shown in Fig. 8.8. To prevent
loss of water by accidental siphoning, suspend the end
ofthe tube a couple of inches higher than the surface of
the water in the storage pit outside and close to where
the tube comes into the shelter. (Despite precautions,
air may accumulate in the highest part of the tube,
blocking a siphoned flow and making it necessary to
re-start the siphoning by repeating the sucking.)
the storage pit cannot be accidentally pulled out of
position.
5. To start the flow of water into the shelter,
hold the free end of the tubeat about the height of the
surface of the water in the storage pit, while pulling
gently on the tube so that the part in the shelter is
practically straight. Exhale as much breath as you
can, then place the end of the tube inyourmouth, and
suck hard and long. (The longer the tube or hose and
the larger its diameter, the more times you will have
to suck to start the flow of water.)
6. Without taking the tube out of your mouth,
shut it off airtight by bending it double near the end.
DISINFECTING WATER
Water-borne diseases probably would kill more
survivors of a nuclear attack than would fallout-
contaminated water. Before an attack, if water from a
municipal source isstored in expedient containers that
could be unclean, it should be disinfected. For long
storage, it is best to disinfect all water, since even a few
organisms may multiply rapidly and givestored watera
bad taste or odor. Properly disinfected water remains
safe for many years if stored in thick plastic or glass
containers sealed airtight. For multi-year storage do
not use thin plastic containers, such as milkjugs, which
in time often develop leaks.
Any household bleach solution, such as Clorox,
that contains sodium hypochlorite as its only activeingredient may be used as a source of chlorine for
disinfecting. The amount of sodium hypochlorite,
usually 5.25%,isprinted on the label. (In recentyears,
perhaps as a precaution against drinking undiluted
chlorine bleach solution, some household bleach
containers show a warningsuch as"Not For Personal
Use." This warning can be safely disregarded if the
label states that the bleach contains only sodium
hypochlorite as its active ingredient, and if only the
small quantities specified in these and other instruc-
tions are used to disinfect water.) Add I scant
teaspoonful to each I0gallons of clearwater, and stir.
Add 2 scant teaspoonfuls if the water is muddy or
colored. Wait at least 30 minutes before drinking, to
allow enough time for the chlorine to kill all the
microorganisms." Properly disinfected water should
have a slight chlorine odor.
To disinfect small quantities of water, put 2
drops of household bleach containing 5.25%sodium
hypochlorite in each quart ofclearwater. Use4drops
if the water is muddy or colored.204 Ifa dropper is not
available, use a spoon and a square-ended strip of
paper or thin cloth about 1/4inch wide by 2 inches
long. Put the strip in the spoon with an end hanging
down about 1/2 inch beyond the end of the spoon.
Then when bleach is placed in the spoon and the
spoon iscarefully tipped, drops the sizeof thosefrom
a medicine dropper will drip off the end of the strip.
As a second choice, 2%tincture of iodine can be
used. Add 5drops to each quart of clearwater, and let
stand 30 minutes." If the water is cloudy, add 10
drops to each quart. Commercial water purification
tablets should be used as directed.
If neither safe water nor chemicals for
disinfecting it are available during a crisis, store
plenty of the best water at hand-even muddy river
water. Most mud settles to the bottom in a fewdays;
even in a crowded shelter ways often could be found
to boil water. Bringing water to a boil for one minute
kills all types of disease-causing bacteria.i" Boiling
for 10 to 20 minutes is required to kill some rarer
infective organisms.
SOURCES OF WATER IN FALLOUT AREAS
Survivors of a nuclear attack should realize that
neither fallout particles nor dissolved radioactive
elements or compounds can be removed from water
by chemical disinfection or boiling. Therefore, water
should be obtained from the least radioactive sources
available. Before a supply of stored drinking water
has been exhausted, othersources should be located.
The main water sources are given below, with the
safest source listed first and the othersources listed in
decreasing order of safety.
1. Water from deep wells and from water tanks
and covered reservoirs into which no fallout particles
or fallout-contaminated water has been introduced.
(Caution: Although most spring waterwould be safe,
some spring water is surface water that has flowed
into and through underground channels without
having been filtered.)
2. Water from covered seepage pits or shallow,
hand-dug wells. This water is usually safe IF fallout
or fallout-contaminated surface water has been
prevented from entering by the use of waterproof
coverings and by waterproofing the surrounding
ground to keep water from running down outside the
well casing. Figure 8.9 is taken from a Chinese civil
defense manual." It shows a well dug to obtain safe
water from a fallout-contaminated source. If the
earth is not sandy, gravelly, or too porous, filtration
through earth is very effective.
3. Contaminated water from deep lakes. Water
from a deep lake would be much lesscontaminated by
dissolved radioactive material and fallout particles
than water from a shallow pond would be, ifboth had
the same amount of fallout per square foot ofsurface
area deposited in them. Furthermore, fallout parti-
cles settle to the bottom more rapidly in deep lakes
than in shallow ponds, which are agitated more by
wind.
4. Contaminated water from shallow ponds and
other shallow, still water.
5. Contaminated water from streams, which
would be especially dangerous if the stream ismuddy
from the first heavy rains after fallout is deposited.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------=-=--=-==--~~---.::=:--------
- -=.====------~~--....--~
Fig. 8.9. A water-filtering well. This Chinese
drawing specifies that this well should be dug 5 to 10
meters (roughly 5 to I0yards)from a pond or stream.WATER FROM WELLS
Fig. 8.10. Lower part of an expedient bail-can.
The unattached, "caged" valve can be made of a
material that does not have the springiness of soft
rubber.
The dangers from drinking fallout-
contaminated water could be greatly lessened by
using expedient settling and filtration methods to
remove fallout particles and most of the dissolved
radioactive material. Fortunately, in areas of heavy
fallout, less than 2% of the radioactivity ofthe fallout
particles contained in the water would become
dissolved in water.25 If nearly all the radioactive
fallout particles could be removed by filtering or
settling methods, few casualties would be likely to
result from drinking and cooking with most fallout-
contaminated water.
diameter of the well-casing pipe. A hole about I inch
in diameter should be cut in the center of the can's
bottom. The hole should be cut from the insideof the
can: this keeps the inside of the bottom smooth, so it
willserve as a smoothseatfor a practicallywatertight
valve. To cut the hole, stand the can on a flat wood
surface and press down repeatedly with the point ofa
sheath knife, a butcher knife, or a sharpened
screwdriver.
The best material for the circular, unattached
valve shown in Fig. 8.10 is soft rubber, smooth and
thin, such as inner-tube rubber. Alternately, the lid of
a can about 3/4inch smaller in diameter than the bail-
can may be used, with several thicknesses of plastic
film taped to its smooth lowerside. Plasticfilm about
4 mils .thick is best. The bail (handle) of a bail-can
should be made of wire, with a loop at the top to
which a rope or strong cord should be attached.
Filling-time can be reduced by taping half-a-
pound of rocks or metal to the bottom of the bail-can.
REMOVING FALLOUT PARTICLES AND
DISSOLVED RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
FROM WATER
• Filtering
Filtering through earth removes essentiallyall of
the fallout particles and more of the dissolved
radioactive material than does boiling-waterdistilla-
tion, a generallyimpractical purification method that
does not eliminate dangerous radioactive iodines.
Earth filters are also more effective in removing
radioactive iodines than are ordinary ion-exchange
water softeners or charcoal filters. In areas of heavy
fallout, about 99% of the radioactivity in watercould
be removed by filtering it through ordinary earth. To
make the simple, effective filter shown in Fig. 8.11,
the only materials needed are those found in and
TAPE
ORNL·DWG 78-6691 R
CIRCULAR. UNATTACHED.
VALVE ABOUT 3/4 in. LESS
IN DIAMETER THAN THE
CAN
lWO
STOP·
WIRES
AT RIGHT
ANGLES
The wells of farms and rural homes would be the
best sources of water for millions of survivors.
Following a massive nuclear attack, the electric
pumps and the pipes in wellsusuallywould be useless.
Electric power in most areas would be eliminated by
the effects of electromagnetic pulse (EMP) from
high-altitude bursts and by the effects of blastand fire
on power stations, transformers, and transmission
lines. However, enough people would know how to
remove these pipes and pumps from wellsso that bail-
cans could be used to reach water and bring up
enough for drinking and basic hygiene:
How to make a simple bail-can is illustrated in
Fig. 8.10. An ordinary large fruit-juice can willserve,
if its diameter is at least I inch smaller than the
CAN
The first runoff will contain most of the radioactive
material that can be dissolved from fallout particles
deposited on the drainage area." Runoff after the
first few heavy rains following the deposit of fallout is
not likely to contain much dissolved radioactive
material, or fallout.
6. Water collected from fallout-contaminated
roofs. This would contain more fallout particles than
would the runoff from the ground.
7. Water obtained by melting snow that has
fallen through air containing fallout particles, or
from snow lying on the ground onto which fallout has
fallen. Avoid using such water for drinking or
cooking, if'possible.
WIRE
THROUGH
SMALL
NAIL HOLES
A CAN TOP
WITH 4-mil
PLASTIC FILM
TAPED ON.
FOR TIGHT
SEAL lOR A
PIECE OF
INNERTUBE
RUBBER IEXPEDIENT FILTRATION
Fig. 8.11. Expedient filter to remove
radioactivity from water.
3. Cover the pebbles with one thickness of
terrycloth towel, burlap sackcloth, or other quite
porous cloth. Cut the cloth in a roughly circular
shape about 3 inches larger than the diameter of the
can.
4. Take soil containing some clay-almost any
soil will do-from at least 4 inches below the surface
of the ground. (Nearly all fallout particles remain
near the surface except after deposition on sand or
gravel.)
• Settling
Settling is one of the easiest methods to remove
most fallout particlesfrom water. Furthermore, ifthe
water to be used is muddy or murky, settling itbefore
filtering will extend the life of the filter. The
procedure is as follows:
I, Fill a bucket or other deep container three-
quarters full of the contaminated water.
2. Dig pulverized clay or clayey soil from a
depth of four or more inches below ground surface,
and stir it into the water. Use about a l-inch depth of
Ifthe 6 or 7 inches offiltering soil isa sandy clay
loam, the filter initially will deliver about 6 quarts of
clear water per hour. (If the filtration rate is faster
than about 1quart in 10 minutes, remove the upper
fabric and recompress the soil.) After several hours,
the rate will bereduced to about 2 quarts per hour.
When the filtering rate becomes too slow, it can
be increased by removing and rinsing the surface
fabric, removing about 1/2 inch of soil, and then
replacing the fabric. The lifeofa filter isextended and
its efficiency increased if muddy waterisfirst allowed
to settle for several hours in a separate container, as
described below. After about 50 quarts have been
filtered, rebuild the filter by replacing the used soil
with fresh soil.
5. Pulverize the soil, thengently press itin layers
over the cloth that covers the pebbles, so that the
cloth is held snugly against the sides of the can. Do
not use pure clay (not porous enough) or sand (too
porous). The soil in the can should be 6 to 7 inches
thick.
6. Completely cover the surface of the soil layer
with one thickness of fabric as porous as a bath towel.
This is to keep the soil from being eroded as water is
poured into the filtering can. The cloth also will
remove some of the particlesfrom the water. Adozen
small stones placed on the cloth near its edges will
secure it adequately.
7. Support the filter can on rods or sticks placed
across the top of a container thatislarger indiameter
than the filter can. (A dishpan will do.)
The contaminated water should be poured into
the filter can, preferably after allowing it to settle as
described below. The filtered water should be
disinfected by one of the previously described
methods.
POROUS
CLOTH
ORNL DWG 77-18431
-_-__~_- - WATER
around the horne. This expedient filter can be built
easily by proceeding as follows:
1. Perforate the bottom of a 5-gallon can, a
large bucket, a watertight wastebasket, or a similar
container with about a dozen nail holes. Punch the
holes from the bottom upward, staying within about
2 inches of the center.
2. Place a layer about 1112inches thick of washed
pebbles or small stones on the bottom of the can. If
pebbles are not available, twisted coat-hanger wires
or small sticks can be used.
STICKS
OVER
PAN ~_-~ f.IL.:IER~D W~EI3 =-_~:dry clay or dry clayey soil for every 4-inch depth of
water. Stir until practically all the clay particles are
suspended in the water.
3. Let the clay settle for at least 6 hours. The
settling clay particles willcarry most of the suspended
fallout particles to the bottom and cover them.
4. Carefully dip out or siphon the clear water,
and disinfect it.
• Settling and Filtering
Although dissolved radioactive material usually
is only a minordanger in fallout-contaminated water,
it is safest to filter even the clear water produced by
settling, if an earth filter is ayailable. Finally-as
always-the water should be disinfected.
POST-FALLOUT REPLENISHMENT
OF STORED WATER
When fallout decays enough to permit shelter
occupants to go out oftheirsheltersfor short periods,
they should try to replenish their stored water. An
enemy may make scattered nuclear strikes for weeks
afteran initial massive attack. Some survivors may be
forced backinto theirshelters by the resultant fallout.
Therefore, all available water containers should be
used to store the least contaminated water within
reach. Even without filtering, water collected and
stored shortly after the occurrence of fallout will
become increasingly safer with time, due particularly
to the rapid decay of radioactive iodines. These
would be the most dangerous contaminants of water
during the first few weeks after an attack.MINIMUM NEEDS
Chapter 9
Food
LOSS OF HIGH-PROTEIN ANIMAL FOODS
The average American is accustomed to eating
regularly and abundantly. He may not realize that
for most people food would not be essential for
survival during the first two or three weeks following
a nuclear attack. Exceptions would be infants, small
children, and the aged and sick, some of whom might
die within a week without proper nourishment. Other
things are more important for short-term survival:
adequate shelter against the dangers from blast and
fallout, an adequate supply of air, and enough
water.
The average American also may not realize that
small daily amounts of a few unprocessed staple
foods would enable him to survive for many months,
or even for years. A healthy person-s-if he is deter-
mined to live and if he learns how to prepare and
use whole-grain wheat or corn-can maintain his
health for several months. Ifbeans are also available
and are substituted for some of the grain, the ration
would be improved and could maintain health for
many months.
The nutritional information given inthis chapter
is taken from a July, 1979 publication, Maintaining
Nutritional Adequacy During a Prolonged Food
Crisis," This book brings together from worldwide
sources the nutritional facts needed to help unpre-
pared people use unaccustomed foods advanta-
geously during the prolonged crisis that would follow
a heavy nuclear attack. The practical know-how
which will be given in this chapter regarding the
expedient processing and cooking of basic grains
and beans is based on old ways which are mostly
unknown to modern Americans. These methods have
been improved and field-tested by civil defense
researchers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
A mass-ive nuclear attack would eliminate the
luxurious, complicated American system of food
production, processing, and distribution. Extensive,
heavy fallout and the inability of farmers to feed
their animals would kill most of the cattle, hogs, and
chickens that are, the basis of our high-protein diet.
The livestock most likely to survive despite their
owners' inability to care for them would be cattle on
pasture. However, these grazing animals would
swallow large numbers of fallout particles alongwith
grass, and many would drink contaminated water.
Their digestive tracts would suffer severe radiation
damage." Also, they would suffer radiation burns
from fallout particles. Thus in an outdoorareawhere
the total dose from gamma radiation emitted within
a fewdays from fallout particles on the ground might
be only 150 R, most grazing animals probably would
be killed by the combined effects of external gamma-
ray radiation, beta burns, and internal radiation."
PRECAUTIONS WHEN EATING MEAT
In areas where the fallout would not be enough
to sicken animals, their meat would be safe food. In
fallout areas, however, animals that have eaten or
drunk fallout-contaminated food or water will have
concentrated radioactive atoms and molecules in
their internal organs. The thyroid gland, kidneys,
and liver especially should not be eaten.
If an animal appears to be sick, it should not be
eaten. The animal might be sufferingfrom a sickening
or fatal radiation dose and might have developed a
bacterial infection as a result of this dose. Meat
contaminated with the toxins produced by some
kinds of bacteria could cause severe illness or death
if eaten, even if thoroughly cooked.Under cnsis conditions, all meat should be
cooked until it is extremely well done-cooked long
past the time when it loses the last of its pink color.
To be sure that the center of each piece of meat is
raised to boiling temperature, the meat should be cut
into pieces that are less than Ih-inch thick before
cooking. This precaution also reducescooking time
and saves fuel.
SURVIVAL OF BREEDING STOCK
Extensive areas of the United States would not
receive fallout heavy enough to kill grazing animals.
The millions of surviving animals would provide
some food and the fertile breeding stock needed for
national recovery. The loss 'of fertility caused by
severe radiation doses is rarely permanent. Extensive
experiments with animals have shown that the
offspring of severely irradiated animals are healthy
and fertile."
LIVING ON BASIC PLANT FOODS
Even if almost all food-producing animals were
lost, most surviving Americans should be able to
live on the foods that enable most of the world's
population to live and multiply: grains, beans, and
vegetables. And because of the remarkable produc-
tivity of American agriculture, there usually would
be enough grain and beans in storage to supply
surviving Americans with sufficient food for at least
a year following a heavy nuclear attack." The
problem would be to get the unprocessed foods,
which are stored in food-producing regions, to the
majority of survivors who would be outside these
regions.
Surprisingly little transportation would be
needed to carry adequate quantities of these un-
processed foods to survivors in famine areas. Asingle
large trailer truck can haul 40,000 pounds of
wheat-enough to keep 40,000 people from feeling
hunger pains for a day. More than enough such
trucks and the fuel needed to carry basic foods to
food-short areas would survive a massive nuclear
attack." It is likely that reasonably strong American
leadership and morale would prevail so that, after
the first few weeks, millions of the survivors in
starving areas should receive basic unprocessed
foods.
Eating food produced in the years after a large
attack would cause an increase in the cancer rate,
due primarily to its content of radioactive strontium
and cesium from fallout-contaminated soil. Over the
first 30 years following an attack, this increasewould
be a small fraction ofthe number ofadditionalcancer
deaths that would result from external radiation."
Cancer deaths would be one of the tragic, delayed
costs of a nuclear war, but all together would not be
numerous enough to endangerthe long-term survival
of the population.
LIVE OFF THE LAND?
Very few survivors of a heavy attack would be
in areas where they could live off the land like
primitive hunters and gatherers. In extensive areas
where fallout would not be heavy enough to kill
human beings, wild creatures would die from the
combi-ned effects 'of external gamma radiation,
swallowed fallout particles, and beta burns on their
bodies. Survival plans should not includedependence
on hunting, fishing, or gathering wild plants.
FOOD FOR SHELTER OCCUPANTS
Most people would need very little food to live
several weeks; however, the time when survivors
of blast and fallout would leave their shelters would
mark the beginning of a much longer period of
privation and hard manual labor. Therefore, to
maintain physical strength and morale, persons in
shelters ideally should have enough healthful food
to provide well-balanced, adequate meals for many
weeks.
In most American homes there are only enough
ready-to-eat, concentrated foods to last a few days.
Obviously, it would be an important survival ad-
vantage to keep on hand a two-week supply of easily
transportable foods. In any case, occupants of
shelters would be uncertain about when they could
get more food and would have to make hard decisions
about how much to eat each day. (Those persons
who have a fallout meter, such as the homemade
instrument described in Chapter 10, could estimate
when and for how long they could emerge from
shelter to find food. As a result, these persons could
ration their limited foods more effectively.)
During the first few weeks of a food crisis, lack
of vitamins and other essentials of a well-balanced
diet would not be of primary importance to pre-
viously well-nourished people. Healthful foods with
enough calories to provide adequate energy would
meet short-term needs. If water is in short supply,
high-protein foods such as meat are best eaten onlyin moderation, since a person eating high-protein
foods requires more water than is needed when
consuming an equal number of calories from foods
high in carbohydrates.
EXPEDIENT PROCESSING OF GRAINS
AND SOYBEANS
Whole-kernelgrains or soybeans cannot be eaten
in sufficient quantities to maintain vigor and health if
merely boiled or parched. A little boiled whole-kernel
wheat is a pleasantly chewy breakfast cereal, but
experimenters at Oak Ridge got sore tongues and very
loose bowels when they tried to eat enough boiled
whole-kernel wheat to supply even half of their daily
energy needs. Some pioneers, however, ate large
quantities of whole-kernelwheatwithoutharm-
ful results after boiling and simmering it for
many hours. Even the most primitive peoples who
subsist primarily on grains grind or pound them
into a meal or paste before cooking. (Rice is the only
important exception.) Few Americans know how to
process whole-kernel grains and soybeans (our largest
food reserves) into meal. ThISignorance could be fatal
to survivors of a nuclear attack.
Making an expedient metate, the hollowed-out
grinding stone of Mexican Indians, proved im-
practical under simulated post-attack conditions.
Pounding grain into meal with a rock or a capped,
solid-ended piece of pipe is extremely slow work.
The best expedient means developed and field-tested
for pounding grain or beans into meal and flour is
an improvised 3-pipe grain mill. Instructions for
making and using this effective grain-pounding
device follow.
piece of pipe with cushioning, slip-prevent-
ing tape, string or cloth-in the locations
illustrated.
(4) Tape or otherwise bind the 3 pipes into a secure
bundle so that their working ends are as even as
possible and are in the same plane-resting
evenly on a flat surface.
(5) Cut the top smoothly out of a large can. A
4-inch-diameter, 7-inch-high fruit-juice can is
ideal. If you do not have a can, improvise some-
thing to keep grain together while pounding it.
ORNL-DWG 73-11449
SLlP- .
PREVENTING
TAPE OR
STRING
AROUND
EACH PIPE----l-----'r
30 in.
1in. OF GRAIN IN A CAN RESTING ON
A HARD, SMOOTH, SOLID SURFACE
Sin.
t
2in.
CAN-
TAPE OR
STRING
BINDING ALL
3 PIPES
TOGETHER
Improvised Grain Mill
The grain mill described can efficiently pound
whole-grain wheat, corn, etc., into meal and
flour-thereby greatly improving digestibility and
avoiding the diarrhea and sore mouths that would
result from eating large quantities of unground
gram.
(I) Cut 3 lengths of pipe, each 30 inches long;
3 r-inch-diameter steel pipe (such as ordinary
water pipe) is best.
(2) Cut the working ends of the pipe off squarely.
Remove all roughness, leaving the full-wall
thickness. Each working end should have the full
diameter of the pipe.
(3) In preparation for binding the three pieces of
pipe together into a firm bundle, encircle each
TO BUILD:TO MAKE MEAL AND FLOUR:
(I) Put clean, dry grain ONE INCH DEEP in the
can.
(2) To prevent blistering your hands, wear gloves,
or wrap cloth around the upper part of the
bundle of pipes.
(3) Place the can (or open-ended cylinder) on a hard,
smooth, solid surface, such as concrete.
(4) To pound the grain, sit with the can held between
your feet. Move the bundle of pipes straight
up and down about 3 inches, with a rapid
stroke.
(5) If the can is 4 inches in diameter, in 4 minutes
you should be able to pound 112 lb (one cup) of
whole-kernel wheat into 1/5 lb of fine meal and
flour, and 3/10 lb of coarse meal and fine-cracked
wheat.
(6) To separate the pounded grain into fine meal,
flour, coarse meal, and fine-cracked wheat, use
a sieve made of window screen.
(7) To separate flour for feeding small children,
place some pounded grain in an 18 X 18-inch
piece of fine nylon net, gather the edges of the
net together so as to hold the grain, and shake
this bag-like container.
(8) To make flour fine enough for babies, pound fine
meal and coarse flour still finer, and sieve it
through a piece of cheesecloth or similar
material.
As soon as fallout decay permits travel, the
grain-grinding machines on tens of thousands of hog
and cattle farms should be used for milling grain for
survivors. It isvitally important to national recovery
and individualsurvival to get back as soonas possible
to labor-saving, mechanized ways of doing essential
work.
In an ORNL experiment, a farmer used a
John Deere Grinder-Mixer powered by a lOO-hp
tractor to grind large samples of wheat and barley.
When it is used to grind rather coarse meal for hogs,
this machine is rated at 12tons per hour. Set to grind
a finer meal-flour mixture for human consumption,
it ground both hard wheat and feed barley at a rate
of about 9 tons per hour. This is 2400 times as fast
as using muscle power to operate even the best ex-
pedient grain mill. With its finest screen installed,
this large machine can produce about 3tons of whole
wheat flour per hour.
Unlike wheat and corn, the kernels of barley,
grain sorghums, and oats have rough, fibrous hulls
that must be removed from the digestible parts to
produce an acceptable food. Moistening the grain
will toughen such hulls and make them easier to
remove. If the grain is promptly pounded orground
into meal, the toughened hulls will break into larger
pieces than will the hulls of undampened grain. A
small amount of water, weighing about 2% of the
weight of the grain, should be used to dampen the
grain. For 3 pounds of grain (about 6 cups), sprinkle
with about one ounce (28 grams, or about 2
tablespoons) of water, while stirring constantly to
moisten all the kernels. After about 5 minutes of
stirring, the grain will appear dry. The small amount
of water will have dampened and toughened the
hulls, but the edible parts'inside will have remained
dry. Larger pieces of hull are easier to remove after
grinding than smaller pieces.
One way to remove ground-up hulls from meal
is by flotation. Put some of the meal-hulls mixture
about I inch deep in a pan or pot, cover the mixture
with water, and stir. Skim off the floating hulls,
then pouroffthe waterand more hulls. Sunken pieces
of hulls that settle on top of the heavier meal can be
removed with one's fingers as the last of the water
is poured off. To produce a barley meal good for
very small children, the small pieces of hulls must
again be separated by flotation.
Figure 9.1 illustrates sieving fine, dry barley-
meal and the smaller pieces ofhulls from the coarser
Fig. 9.I. Sieving ground barleythrougha window-
screen sieve.meal and the larger pieces. The sieve was made of
a piece of window screen that measured 20 X 20
inches before its sides were folded up and wired to
form an open-topped box.
To lessen their laxative effects, all grains should
be ground as finely as possible, and most of the hulls
should be removed. Grains also willbedigested more
easily if they are finely ground. The occupants of
crowded shelters should beespeciallycareful to avoid
foods that cause diarrhea.
COOKING WITH MINIMUM FUEL
In areas of heavy fallout, people would have to
remain continuously in crowded shelters for many
days. Then they would have to stay in the shelters
most of each 24 hours for weeks. Most shelter
occupants soon would consume all of their ready-
to-eat foods; therefore, they should have portable,
efficient cook stoves. A cook stove is important for
another reason: to help maintain morale. Even in
warm weather, people need some hot food and drink
for the comforting effect and to promote a sense
of well-being. This is particularly true when people
are under stress. The Bucket Stove pictured on the
following pages (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3) was the most
satisfactory of several models of expedient stoves
developed at Oak Ridge and later field-tested.
• Bucket Stove
If operated properly, this stove burns only about
I, pound of dry wood or newspaper to heat 3quarts
of water from 60°F to boiling.
Materials requiredfor the stove:
* A metal bucket or can, 12- to 16-quart sizes
preferred. The illustrations show a 14-quart bucket
and a 6-quart pot.
• Nine all-metal coat hangers for the parts
made of wire. (To secure the separate parts of the
movable coat-hanger wire grate, 2 feet of finer wire
is helpful.)
• A 6 X lO-inch piece of a large fruit-juice
can, for a damper.
Construction:
With a chisel (or a sharpened screw driver) and
a hammer, cut a 41 , X 4lh-inch hole in the side of
the bucket about II., inches above its bottom. To
avoid denting the side of the bucket when chiseling
out the hole, place the bucket over the end of a logor
similar solid object.
To make the damper, cut a 6-inch-wide by
lO-inch-high piece out of a large fruit-juice can or
from similar light metal. Then make the two coat-
hanger-wire springs illustrated, and attach them to
the piece of metal by bending and hammering the
outer I inch of the two 6-inch-Iong sides over and
around the two spring wires. This damper can be slid
up and down, to open and close the hole in the
bucket. The springs hold it inany desired position. (If
materials for making this damper are not available,
the air supply can be regulated fairly well by placing
a brick, rock, or piece of metal so that it will block
off part of the hole in the side of the bucket.)
To make a support for the pot, punch 4 holes
in the sides of the bucket, equally spaced around it
and about 31/2 inches below the bucket's top. Then
run a coat-hanger wire through each of the two pairs
of holes on opposite sides of the bucket. Bend these
two wires over the top of the bucket, as illustrated, so
that their four ends form free-ended springs to hold
the cooking pot centered in the bucket. Pressure on
the pot from these four free-ended, sliding springs
does not hinder putting it into the stove or taking
it out.
Bend and twist 4 or 5 coat hangers to make the
movable grate, best made with the approximate
dimensions given in Fig. 9.2.
For adjusting the burning pieces offuel on the
grate, make a pair of 12-inch-Iong tongs of coat-
hanger wire, as illustrated by Fig. 9.3.
To lessen heat losses through the sides and
bottom of the bucket, cover the bottom with about
I inch of dry sand or earth. Then line part of the inside
and bottom with two thicknesses of heavy-duty
aluminum foil, if available.
To make it easier to place the pot in the stove
or take it out without spilling itscontents, replace the
original bucket handle with a longer piece of strong
wire.
Operation:
The Bucket Stove owes its efficiency to: (I) the
adjustable air supply that flows up through the
burning fuel, (2) the movable grate that lets the
operator keep the maximum amount of flame in
contact with the bottom of the cooking pot, and
(3) the space between the sides of the pot and the
inside of the bucket that keeps the rising hot gases
in close contact with the sides of the pot.
In a shelter, a Bucket Stove should be placed
as near as practical to an air exhaust opening before
a fire is started in it.Fig. 9.2. Bucket-stove with adjustable damper and movable wire grate.Fig. 9.3. Bucket-stove with its sliding damper partly closed. Foot-long tongs of coat hanger wire
are especially useful when burning twisted half-pages of newspaper.If wood is to be burned, cut anti split dry wood
into small pieces approximately 1/2inch square and
6 inches long. Start the fire with paper and small
slivers of wood, placing some under the wire grate.
To keep fuel from getting damp in a humid shelter,
keep it in a large plastic bag.
If newspaper is to be burned, use half-pages
folded and twisted into. 5-inch-long "sticks," as
illustrated. Using the wire tongs, feed a paper"stick"
into the fire about every half-minute.
Add fuel and adjust the damper to keep the
flame high enough to reach the bottom of the pot,
but not so high as to go up the sides of the pot.
To use the Bucket Stove for heating in very
cold weather, remove the pot and any insulation
around the sides of the bucket; burn somewhat more
fuel per minute.
If used with the Fireless Cooker described on
the following pages, a Bucket Stove can be used
to thoroughly cook beans, grain, or tough meat
in water. Three quarts of such food can be cooked
with less fuel than is required to soft-boil an egg
over a small campfire.
• Fireless Cooker
A Fireless Cooker cooks by keeping a lidded
pot of boiling-hot food so well insulated all around
that it loses heat very slowly. Figure 9.4 shows one
of these simple fuel-saving devices made from a
bushel basket filled with insulating newspapers,
with a towel-lined cavity in the center. The cavity is
the size of the 6-quart pot. A towel in this cavity goes
all around the pot and willbe placed overit to restrict
air circulation. If the boiling-hot pot of food is then
covered with newspapers about 4 inches thick, the
temperature will remain for hours so near boiling
that in 4 or 5 hours even slow-cooking food will be
ready to eat.
The essential materials for making an effective
Fireless Cooker are enough of any good insulating
materials (blankets, coats, paper, hay that isdry and
pliable) to cover the boiling-hot pot all over with at
least 3 or 4 inches of insulation. A container to keep
the insulating materials in place around the pot is
useful.
Wheat, other grains, and small pieces of tough
meat can be thoroughly cooked by boiling them
briskly for only about 5 minutes, then insulating
the pot in a Fireless Cooker for 4 or 5 hours, or
Fig. 9.4. Boiling-hot pot of food being placed in
an expedient Fireless Cooker.
overnight. Whole beans should be boiled for 10 to
15 minutes before they are placed in a Fireless
Cooker.
COOKING GRAIN AND BEANS WHEN
SHORT OF FUEL OR POTS
• Cooking Grain Alone
When whole grains are pounded or ground by
expedient means, the result usually is a mixture of
coarse meal, fine meal, and a little flour. Under
shelter conditions, the best way to cook such meal
is first to bring the water to a boil (3 parts of water
for I part of meal). Add 1teaspoon (5 grams) of salt
per pound of dry meal. Remove the pot from the fire
(or stop adding fuel to a Bucket Stove) and quickly
stir the meal into the hot water. (Ifthe meal isstirred
into briskly boiling water, lumping becomes a worse
problem.) Then, while stirring constantly, again
bring the pot to a rolling boil. Since the meal isjust
beginning to swell, more unabsorbed water remains,
so there is lesssticking and scorching than ifthe meal
were added to cold water and then brought to
a boil.If any type of Fireless Cooker is available, the
hot cereal only has to be boiled and stirred long
enough so that no thin, watery part remains. This
usually takes about 5 minutes. Continue to cook,
either in the Fireless Cooker for at least 4 or 5 hours,
or by boiling for an additional 15 or 20 minutes.
When it is necessary to boil grain meal for many
minutes, minimize sticking and scorching by cook-
ing I part of dry meal with at least 4 parts of water.
However. cooking a thinner hot cereal has a dis-
advantage during a food crisis: an increased volume
of food must be eaten to satisfy one's energy
needs.
If grain were the only food available, few
Americans doing physical work could eat enough
of it to maintain their weight at first, until their
digestive tracts enlarged from eating the very bulky
foods. This adaptation could take a few months.
Small children could not adjust adequately to an
all-grain diet: for them, concentrated foods such as
fats also are needed to provide enough calories to
maintain growth and health.
• Cooking Grain and Beans Together
When soybeans are being used to supplement the
lower quality proteins of grain and when fuel or pots
are inshort supply, first grind or pound the beans into a
fine meal. To further reduce cooking time, soak the
bean meal for a couple ofhours, keeping itcovered with
wateras itswells. Next put the soaked bean meal into a
pot containing about 3 times as much water as the
combined volume of a mixture of 1 part of dry
bean meal and 3 or 4 parts of dry grain meal.
Gently boil the bean meal for about 15minutes, stirring
frequently. before adding the grain meal and
completing the cooking.
Stop boiling and add the grain meal while stirring
constantly. Again bring the pot to a boil, stirring to
prevent sticking and scorching, and boil until the meal
has swelled enough to have absorbed all the water.
After salting. boil the grain-bean mush for another 15
minutes or more before eating, or put it in a fireless
cooker for at least 4 or 5 hours.
Soybeans boiled alone have a taste that most
people find objectionable. Also, whole soybeans must
be boiled for a couple of hours to soften them
sufficiently. But if soybeans are pounded or ground
into a fine meal, and then 1partof the soybeanmeal
is boiled with 4 parts of meal made from corn or
another grain, the soybeans give a pleasant
sweetish taste to the resulting mush. The un-
pleasant soybean taste is eliminated. If cooked as
described above, soybeans and other beans or dried
peas can be made digestible and palatable with mini-
mum cooking.
100% GRAIN AND 100% BEAN DIETS
A diet consisting solely of wheat, corn, or rice,
and salt has most of the essential nutrients. The
critical deficiencies would be vitamins A, C, and D.
Such a grain-based diet can serve adults and older
children as their "staff of life" for months. Table 9.1
shows how less than 13(4 pounds of whole wheat
or dry yellow corn satisfies most of the essential
nutritional requirements of a long-term emergency
ration. [The nutritional values that are deficient are
printed in bold type, to make an easier comparison
with the Emergency Recommendations, also printed
in bold type. Food energy is given in kilocalories
(kcal), commonly called calories (Cal).] Expedient
ways of supplying the nutrients missing from these
rations are described in a following section of this
chapter.
Other common whole grains would serve about
as well as wheat and yellow corn. At least 1(6 oz of salt
per day (about 5 grams) is essential for any ration
that is to be eaten for more than a few days, but 't, oz
(about 10 g or 3(4 tablespoon) should be available
to allow for increased salt needs and to make grain
and beans more palatable. This additional salt would
be consumed as needed.
To repeat: few Americans at first would be able
to eat the 3 or 4 quarts of thick mush that would be
necessary with a ration consisting solely of whole-
kernel wheat or corn. Only healthy Americans
determined to survive would be likely to fare well
for months on such unaccustomed and monotonous
food as an all-graindiet. Eatingtwo or more different
kinds of grain and cooking in different ways would
make an all-grain diet both more acceptable and
more nourishing.
Not many people would be able to eat 27 oz
(dry weight before cooking) of beans in a day, and
fewer yet could eat a daily ration of almost 23 oz
of soybeans. Beans as single-food diets are not
recommended because their large protein content
requires the drinking of more fluids. Roasted peanuts
would provide a better single-food ration.
GRAIN SUPPLEMENTED WITH BEANS
People who live on essentially vegetarian diets
eat a little of their higher-quality protein food at every
meal, along with the grain that is their main source
of nutrition. Thus Mexicans eat some beans along
with their corn tortillas, and Chinese eat a little
fermented soybean food or a bit of meat or fish with
a bowl of rice. Nutritionists have found that grainsTable 9.1. Daily rations of 100% grain, beans, or peanuts"
Yellow
Wheat Field
(dry) Cornt,
(dry)
Weight 790g 750g
(27.8oz) (26.4 oz)
Energy. kcal 2600 2600
Protein, g 103 67
Fat, g 15 29
Calcium, mg 324 165
Magnesium. mg 1260 1100
Iron. mg 26 15.7
Potassium, mg 2920 2130
Vitamin A. RE 0 368
Thiamin. mg 4.3 2.8
Riboflavin. mg 1.0 0.9
:\iacin. mg 34.0 16.5"
Vitamin C. mg 0 0
Vitamin D, !1g 0 0
Emergency
Recommendations
2600
55'
30
400
200300
10
1500 2000
555
1.0
1.4
[7.0
15-30
Oe
Soybeans Red Beans Peanuts
(dry) (dry) (roasted)
645g 760g 447g
(22.7 oz) (26.8 oz) ([5.807)
2600 2600 2600
220 171 117
114 II 218
1458 836 322
1710 1240 782
54.2 52.4 9,8
10800 7420 3132
52 15 0
7.1 3.9 1.3
2.0 1.5 0.6
14.2 17.5 76.4
0 0 0
0 0 0
"Salt (I 1 oz. or 10 g, or', tablespoon) should be available. This would be consumed as needed.
"White corn supplies no Vitamin A, whereas yellow corn supplies 49 RE (retinol equivalent, a measure of Vitamin A value)
per 100gdry weight. Most corn in the United States is yellow corn.
'Ifa diet contains some animal protein such as meat, eggs, or milk. the recommended protein would be lessthan 55g per day.
If most of the protein is from milk or eggs. only 41 g per day is recommended.
"The niacin in corn is not fully available unless the corn is treated with an alkali. such as the lime or ashes Mexicans (and
many Americans) add to the water in which corn kernels are soaked or boiled.
',Infants. children, and pregnant and lactating women should receive IOfig (10 micrograms, or400 IV) ofvitamin D. For
others. the current recommended daily allowance (RDA) for vitamin D is 200 IV (5~g).
are low in some of the essential amino acids that the
human body needs to build its proteins. For long-term
good health, the essential aminoacids must besupplied
in the right proportions with each mealby eating some
foods with more complete proteins than grains have.
Therefore, in a prolonged food crisis one should strive
to eat atevery mealat least a little of any higher-quality
protein foods that are available. These include ordinary
beans, soybeans, milk powder, meat, and eggs.
Table 9.2 shows that by adding 7.0 oz (200 g) of
red beans (or other common dried beans) to 21.1 oz
(600 g) of either whole wheat or yellow corn, with salt
added, you can produce rations that contain adequate
amounts of all the important nutrients except vitamin
C, vitamin A, vitamin D, and fat. If 5.3 oz (150 g) of
soybeans are substituted for the red beans, the fat
requirement is satisfied. The 600 g of yellow corn
contains enough carotene to enable the body to
produce morethan halfthe emergency recommendation
ofvitamin A.The small deficiencies inriboflavin would
not cause sickness.
Otherabundant grains, such asgrain sorghums or
barley, may beused instead of the wheat or cornshown
in Table 9.2 to produce fairly well-balanced rations.
Other legumes would serve to supplement grain about
as well as red beans. (Peanuts are the exception: al-
though higherinenergy(fat)thanany otherunprocessed
food, the qualityoftheir protein isnot as high asthat of
other legumes.)
EXPEDIENT WAYS TO SUPPLY DEFICIENT
ESSENTIAL NUTRIENTS
• Vitamin C
A deficiency of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) causes
scurvy. This deadly scourge would be the first nutri-
tional disease to afflict people having only grain and/or
beans and lacking the know-how needed to sprout
them and produce enough vitamin C. Within only 4to
6weeks of eatinga ration containingno vitamin C, the
first symptom of scurvy would appear: swollen and
bleeding gums. This would be followed by weakness,
then large bruises, hemorrhages, and wounds that
would not heal. Finally, death from hemorrhages and
heart failure would result.
The simplest and least expensive way to
make sure that you, your family and neighbors
do not sufferordie post-attackfrom scurvyis to
buyonekilogram (1,000,000milligrams) ofpure
vitamin C, which is the crystalline "ascorbic
acid" form. Unlike vitamin C tablets, pure vita-
minCcrystalsdonotdeteriorate.Aninexpensive
mailorder source is Bronson Pharmaceutical,
4526 Rinetti Lane, La Canada, California 91011;Table 9.2. Daily rations of whole wheat or yellow corn supplemented with soybeans or red beans.
Recommended daily salt ration, including salt in food: 3/4 tablespoon ([/3oz, or 10 g).
600g (21.1 07) 600g (21.1 07) 600g (2I.I 07) 600g (21.107)
Whole wheat plus Whole wheat plus Emergency Yellow corn" plus Yellow corn plus
200g (7.0 07) 150g (5.307) Recommendations 150g (5.3 07) 200g (7.0 (7)
Red beans (dry wt) Soybeans (dry wt) Soybeans (dry wt) Red beans (dry wt)
Energy. kcal 2.666 2.585 2.600 2.693 2.774
Protein. g 123 129 55" 105 98
Fat. g 15 39 30 50 26
Calcium. mg 466 585 400 471 352
Magnesium, mg 1.286 1.358 200 300 1.280 1.208
Iron. mg 33.6 32.4 10 25.2 26.4
Potassium. mg 4.188 4.736 1.500 2.000 4.220 3.672
Vitamin A. RE 4 12 555 306 298
Thiamin. mg 4.3 5.0 1.0 3.9 3.2
Riboflavin. mg l.l 1.2 1.4 1.2 l.l
'\iacin. mg 30.4 29.1 17.0 16.5' 17.8
Vitamin C. mg 0 0 15 30 0 0
Vitamin D. fJ.g 0 0 0" 0 0
'White corn supplies no vitamin A. whereas yellow corn supplies.49RE (retinol equivalent. a measure of vitamin A value)
per 100g dry weight. Most corn in the United States is yellow corn.
"If a diet contains animal protein such as meat. eggs or milk. the recommended protein would be less than 55g per day. Ifall
the protein is from milk or eggs. only 41g per day is required.
The niacin in corn is not fully available unless corn is treated with an alkali, such as the lime or ashes added by Mexicans
and Americans in the South and Southwest to the water in which they soak or boil corn kernels.
·'.Infants. children. and pregnant and lactating women should receive IOllg(10 micrograms. or400 IV) ofvitamin D. For
others. the current recommended daily allowance (RDA) for vitamin D is 200 IV (5I-'g).
in 1988 I boughtone kilogramfor$18.75, postage
paid. An ample daily dose is 25 milligrams,
about 0.0009 ounce. Ten grams (about one third
ounce) isenoughfor a wholeyearfor oneperson
who is eating only unsprouted grain and/or
other foods providing no vitamin C. One gram
(1,000 mg) of crystalline ascorbic acid is 1/4
teaspoonful. If you do not have a 1/4 teaspoon,
put one level teaspoonful of the crystals on a
piece of paper, and divide the little pile into 4
equal parts: each will be approximately 1,000
mg. One of these 1,000 mg piles can easily be
divided into 4 tiny piles, each 250 mg. A 250 mg
pile provides 10 ample daily doses of 25 mg
each. If your family has ~ 1,000,000 mg supply,
taking a 50 mg daily dose of pure crystalline
ascorbic acid may be preferred, eithersprinkled
on food or dissolved in water.
One good expedient way to prevent or cure scurvy
is to eat sprouted seeds - not just the sprouts.
Sprouted beans prevented scurvy during a famine in
India. Captain James Cook wasable to keep hissailors
from developing scurvy during a three-year voyage by
having them drink an unfermented beer made from
dried, sprouted barley. For centuries the Chinese have
prevented scurvy during the long winters of northern
China by consuming sprouted beans.
Only IO mg of vitamin C taken each day (1/5 of
the smallest vitamin C tablet) is enough to prevent
scurvy. Ifa little over an ounce (about 30grams) of dry
beans or dry wheat is sprouted until the sprouts are a
little longer than the seeds, the sprouted seeds will
supply 10 to 15 mg of vitamin C. Such sprouting, if
done at normal room temperature, requires about 48
hours. To preventsickness and to make sprouted beans
more digestible, the sprouted seeds should be boiled in
water for not longer than 2 minutes. Longer cooking
willdestroy too much vitamin C.
Usual sprouting methods produce longer sprouts
than are necessary when production ofenough vitamin
C is the objective. These methods involve rinsing the
sprouting seeds several times a day in safe water. Since
even survivors not confined to shelters are likely to be
short of water, the method illustrated in Fig. 9.5should
be used. First the seeds to be sprouted are picked clean
of trash and broken seeds. Then the seeds are covered
with water and soaked for about 12hours. Next, the
water is drained off and the soaked, swollen seeds are
placed on the inside of a plastic bag or ajar, in a layer
no more than an inch deep. Ifa plastic bag isused, you
should make two loose rolls of paper, crumple them a
little, dampen them, and place them inside the bag,
along its sides. As shown in Fig. 9.5, these two
dampened paper rolls keep the plastic from resting on
the seeds and form an air passage down the center of
the bag. Wetpapershould beplaced inthe mouth ofthe
bag or jar so as to leave an air opening of only about I
square inch. If this paper is kept moist, the seeds will
remain sufficientlydampwhilereceivingenoughcircula-
tingair to prevent molding. They willsproutsufficiently
after about 48 hours at normal room temperature.Fig. 9.5. Sprouting with minimum water.
Sprouting seeds also increases their content
of riboflavin, niacin, and folic acid. Sprouted beans
are more digestible than raw, urisprouted beans, but
not as easily digested or nourishing as are sprouted
beans that have been boiled or sauteed for a couple
of minutes. Sprouting is not a substitute for cooking.
Contrary to the claims of some health food publi-
cations, sprouting does not increase the protein
content of seeds, nor does it improve protein quality.
Furthermore, sprouting reduces the caloric value of
seeds. The warmth generated by germinating seeds
reduces their energy value somewhat, as compared
to unsprouted seeds.
• Vitamin A
Well-nourished adults have enough vitamin A
stored in their livers to prevent vitamin A deficiency
problems for several months, even if theirdiet during
that time contains none of this' essential vitamin.
Children would be affected by deficiencies sooner
than adults. The first symptom is an inability to see
well in dim light. Continuing deficiency causes
changes in body tissues. In infants and children,
lack of vitamin A can result in stunted growth and
serious eye problems-even blindness. Therefore, a
survival diet should be balanced with respect to
vitamin A as soon as possible, with children having
priority.
Milk, butter, and margarine are common
vitamin A sources that would not be available to
most survivors. If these were no longer available,
yellow corn, carrots, and green, leafy vegetables
(including dandelion greens) would be the best
sources. If these foods were not obtainable, the next
best source would be sprouted whole-kernel wheat
or other grains-if seeds could be sprouted for three
days in the light, so that the sprouts are green.
Although better than no source, sprouting is not
a very satisfactory way to meet vitamin A require-
ments. The development of fibrous roots makes
3-day sprouted wheat kernels difficult to eat. And
one must eat a large amount of seeds with green
sprouts and roots to satisfy the recommended daily
emergency requirements-up to 51/ 2 cups of 5-day
sprouted alfalfa seeds. Survivors of a nuclear attack
would wish they had kept an emergency store of
multivitamin pills.
• Vitamin 0
Without vitamin D, calcium is not adequately
absorbed. As a result, infants and children would
develop rickets (a disease of defective bone mineral-
ization). A massive nuclear attack would cut off
the vast majority of Americans from their main
source of Vitamin D, fortified milk.
Vitamin D can be formed in the body if the
skin is exposed to the ultraviolet rays of the sun.
Infants should be exposed to sunlight very cau-
tiously, initially for only a few minutes-especially
after a massive nuclear attack. Such an attack
possibly could causeatmospheric changes thatwould
permit more ultraviolet light to reach the earth's
surface, causing sunburn in the U.S. as severe
as on the equator today. In cold weather, maxi-
mum exposure of skin to sunlight is best done in a
shallow pit shielded from the wind. Exposure in a
shallow pit would give about 90 percent pro-
tection from gamma radiation from fallout
particles on the surrounding ground.
• Niacin and Calcium
Niacin deficiency causes pellagra, a disease that
results in weakness, a rash on skin exposed to the
sun, severe diarrhea, and mental deterioration. If a
typical modern American had a diet primarily of
corn and lacked the foods that normally supply
niacin, symptoms of pellagra would first appear in
about 6 months. Since corn is by far our largest
crop-the U.S. production in 1985 was about 425
billion pounds-theskillful treatment of corn would
be important to post-attack survival and recovery.
During the first part of this century, pellagra
killed thousands of Americans in the South each
year. These people had cornfor their principalstaple
and ate few animal protein foods or beans. YetMexicans, who eat even more corn than did those
Southerners-and have even fewer foods of animal
origin-do not suffer from pellagra.
The Mexicans' freedom from pellagra is mainly
due to their traditional method of soaking and
boiling their dried corn in a lime-water solution.
They use either dry, unslaked lime (calcium oxide, a
dangerously corrosive substance made by roasting
limestone) or dry, slaked lime (calcium hydroxide,
made by adding water to unslaked lime). Dry lime
weighing about I% as much as the dry corn isadded
to the soak water, producing an alkaline solution.
Wood ashes also can be used instead of lime to make
an alkali solution. Thealkalitreatment of corn makes
the niacin available to the human body..Tables 9.1
and 9.2 show corn as having adequate niacin.
However, the niacin in dried corn is not readily
available to the body unless the corn has received
an alkali treatment.
Treating corn with lime has another nutritional
advantage: the low calcium content of corn issignifi-
cantly increased.
• Fat
The emergency recommendation for fat is
slightly over I ounce per day (30 g) of fat or cooking
oil. This amount of fat provides only 10% of the
calories in the emergency diet, which does not specify
a greater amount because fats would be in very short
supply after a nuclearattack. This amount isvery low
when compared to the average diet eaten in this
country, in which fat provides about 40% of the
calories. It would be difficult for many Americans to
consume sufficient calories to maintain normal
weight and morale without a higher fat intake; more
fat should be made available as soon as possible.
Increased fat intake is especially importantfor young
children, to provide calories needed for normal
growth and development. Oak Ridge National
Laboratory field tests have shown that toddlers and
old people, especially, prefer considerably more oil
added to grain mush than the emergency recom-
mendation of 10%.
• Vitamin 8-12 and Animal Protein
Vitamin 8-12 isthe only essential nutrient that is
available in nature solely from animal sources. Since
a normal person has a 2 to 4-year supply of vitamin
8-12 stored in his liver, a deficiency should not
develop before enough food of animal origin would
again be available.
Many adults who are strict vegetarians keep
in good health for years without any animal sources
of food by using grains and beans together. It is
more difficult to maintain normal growth and
development in young children on vegetarian diets.
When sufficient animal sources of food areavailable,
enough should be provided to supply 7 grams of
animal protein daily. This could be provided by
about 1.4ounces (38 g) of lean meat, 0.7 ounce (20 g)
of nonfat dry milk, or one medium-sized egg. When
supplies are limited, young children should be given
priority. Again: a little of these high-grade supple-
mentary protein foods should be eaten with every
meal.
• Iron
Most people live out their lives without benefit
of an iron supplement. However, many pregnant
and nursing women and some children need
supplemental iron to prevent anemia. One tested
expedient way to make more iron available is to use
iron pots and pans, especially for cooking acid foods
such as tomatoes. Another is to place plain iron nails
(not galvanized nails) in vinegar until small amounts
of iron beginto float to the surface. Thisusuallytakes
2 to 4 weeks. Then a teaspoon of iron-vinegar
solution will contain about 30 to 60 mg of iron,
enough for a daily supplement. The emergency
recommendation is 10mg per day. A teaspoon of the
iron-vinegar solution is best taken in a glass of water.
The iron content of fruit, such as an apple, can be
increased by placing iron nails in it for a few days.
FOOD RESERVES
Russia, China, and other countries that make
serious preparations to survive disasters store large
quantities offood-primarilygrain-both infarming
areas and- near population centers. In contrast, the
usually large U.S. stocks of grain and soybeans are
an unplanned survival resource resulting from the
production of more food than Americans can eat or
sell abroad. The high productivity of U.S. agriculture
is another unplanned survival asset. Providing
enough calories and other essential nutrients for
100 million surviving Americans would necessitate
the annual raising of only about 12% of our 1985
crop ofcorn, wheat, grain sorghum, and soybeans
- if nothing else were produced. In 1985, the U.S.production of corn, wheat, soybeans, and grain
sorghum totalled about 625 billion pounds -
about 7 pounds per day for one year for every
American. A total of 2 pounds per person per day of
these basic staples, in the proportions shown in Table
9.2, would be sufficient to provide the essentials of an
adequate vegetarian diet weighing about 27 ounces.
(Grain sorghum is not listed in Table 9.2; it has
approximately the same food value as corn.) The
remaining 5ounces of the 2 pounds would feed enough
chickens to meet a survivor's minimum long-term re-
quirement for animal protein.
If corn, wheat, grain sorghum, and soybeans were
the only crops raised, the annual production would need
to beonly739 poundsperperson. Our 1985annual
production would have supplied every adult,
child, and infant in a population of 100 million
with 6250 pounds of these four staples..This is
more than 8 times enough to maintain good
nutrition by Chinese standards.
Recovery from a massive nuclear attack would
depend largelyon sufficientfood reservesbeingavailable
to enable survivors to concentrate on restoring the
essentials of mechanized farming. Enough housing
would remain intact or could be built to provide
adequate shelter for the first few crucial years; enough
clothing and fabrics would be available. But ifsurvivors
were forced by hunger to expend their energies at-
tempting primitive subsistence farming, many deaths
from starvation would occur and the prospects for
national recovery would be greatly reduced.
Americans' greatestsurvivalassetattheend
of 1985 was about 17 billion bushels (about 850
billion pounds) of wheat, corn, grain sorghums,
and soybeans in storage, mostly on farms. If200
million Americans were to survive a limited
nuclear attack and if only half of this stored food
reserve could be delivered to the needy, each
survivor would have adequate food for over 3
years, by Chinese nutritional standards.
In view of the crucial importance of large food
reserves to the prospects for individual and national
survival, it is to be hoped that U.S. food surpluses and
large annual carry-overs willcontinue.
A BASIC SURVIVAL RAnON TO STORE
Arationcomposed ofthe basicfoods listedbelowin
Table 9.3 provides about 2600 calories per day and is
nutritionally balanced. It keeps better than a ration of
typical Americanfoods, requires much lessspaceto store
or transport, and ismuch lessexpensive. The authorand
some friends have stored enough of these basic foods to
last their families several months during a crisis, and
have eaten large quantities of these foods with satis-
faction over the past 20 years. (A different emergency
ration should be stored for infants and very small
children, as will be explained in the following section.)
Field tests have indicated thatthe majority of Americans
would find these basic foods acceptable under crisis
conditions. In normal times, however, no one should
store this or any otheremergencyfood supplyuntil after
he has prepared, eaten, and found its components
satisfactory.
Unprocessed grains and beans provide adequate
nourishment for many millions of the world's people
who have littleelseto eat. Dry grains and beans are very
compact: a 5-gallon can holds about 38 pounds of hard
wheat. Yetwhencooked,dry wholegrains become bulky
and givea well-fedfeeling - a distinct advantage ifit is
necessary to go on short rations during a prolonged
cnsis.
This basic ration has two disadvantages: (I) it
requires cooking, and (2) Americans are un-
accustomed to such a diet. Cooking difficulties can
be minimized by having a grain-grinding device, a
Table 9.3. A basic survival ration for multi-year storage
Ounces Grams Pounds Kilograms
per day per day for 30 days for 30days
full ration full ration
Whole-kernel hard wheat 16 454 30.0 13.6
Beans 5 142 9.4 4.3
Non-fat milk powder 2 57 3.8 1.7
Vegetable oil 28 1.9 0.9
Sugar 2 57 3.8 1.7
Salt (iodized) .s.. ---ill- 0.63 ~
Total Weights 26'/) 748 49.5 22.5
Multi-vitamin pills: I pill each daybucket stove with a few pounds of dry wood or
newspapers for fuel, and the know-how to make a
"fireless cooker" by using available insulating ma-
terials such as extra clothing. The disadvantage of
starting to eat unaccustomed foods at a stressful
time can be lessened by eating more whole grains
and beans in normal times-thereby, incidentally,
saving money and improving a typical American
diet by reducing fat and increasing bulk and fiber.
When storing enough of this ration to last for
several months or a year, it is best to select several
kinds of beans for variety and improved nutrition.
If soybeans are included, take into account the dif-
ferences between soybeans and common beans, as
noted earlier in this chapter.
In many areas it is difficult to buy wheat and
beans at prices nearly as low as the farmer receives
for these commodities. However, in an increasing
number of communities, at least one store sells
whole-grain wheat and beans in large sacks at
reasonable prices. Mormons, who store food for a
range of possible personal and national disasters, are
often the best sources of information about where
to get basic foods in quantity, at reasonable cost.
Soon after purchase, bulk foods should be removed
from sacks (but not necessarily from sealed-plastic
liner-bags) and sealed in metal containers or in
thick-walled plastic containersfor storage. Especially
in the more humid parts of the United States, grain
and beans should befrequently checked for moisture.
If necessary, these foods should be dried out and
rid of insects as described later in this chapter.
Vegetable oil stores as well in plastic bottles as
in glass ones. The toughness and lightness of plastic
bottles make them better than glass for carrying
when evacuating or for using in a shelter. Since a
pound ofoil provides about 21/4times as muchenergy
as does a pound of sugar, dry grain, or milk powder,
storing additional vegetable oil is an efficient way
to improve a grain diet and make it more like the
40o/c-fat diet of typical Americans.
All multivitamin pills providing 5000 Inter-
national Units (1500 mg retinol equivalent) vitamin
A, 400 IV (10 mg) of vitamin 0, and 50 to 100 mg
of vitamin C, must meet U.S. Governmentstandards,
so the least expensive usually are quite adequate.
Storage in a refrigerator greatly lengthens the time
before vitamin pills must be replaced with fresh
ones. Because vitamin C is so essential, yet very
inexpensive and long-lasting, it is prudent to store
a large bottle.
It would be wise to have on hand ready-to-eat,
compact foods for use during a week or two in a
shelter, in addition to those normally kept in the
kitchen. It is not necessary to buy expensive"survival
foods" or the special dehydrated foods carried by
many backpackers. All large food stores sell the
following concentrated foods: non-fat milk powder,
canned peanuts, compact ready-to-eat dry cereals
such as Grape Nuts, canned meat and fish, white
sugar, vegetable oil in plastic bottles, iodized salt,
and daily multivitamin pills. If shelter occupants
have a way to boil water(seeFigs. 9.2 and 9.3, Bucket
Stove), it isadvisable to include rice, noodles, and an
"instant" cooked cereal such as oatmeal or
wheat-along with coffee and tea for those who
habitually drink these beverages.
Parched grain is a ready-to-eat food that has
been used for thousands of years. Whole-kernel
wheat, corn, and rice can be parched by the following
method: Place the kernels about 1/4-inch deep in a
pan, a skillet, or a tin can while shaking it over a
flame, hot coals, or a' red hot electric burner. The
kernels will puff and brown slightly when parched.
These parchedgrainsare notdifficult to chewand can
be pounded to a meal more easily than can the raw
kernels. Parched grain-stores well ifkept dry and free
of insects.
EMERGENCY FOOD FOR BABIES
Infants and very small children would be the
first victims of starvation after a heavy nuclear
attack, unless special preparations are made on their
behalf. Our huge stocks of unprocessed foods, which
could prevent the majority of unprepared survivors
from dying of hunger, would not be suitable for the
very young. They need foods that are more con-
centrated and less rough. Most American mothers do
not nurse their infants, and if a family's supply of
baby foods were exhausted the parents might ex-
perience the agony of seeing their baby slowly
starve.
Few Americans have watched babies starving.
In China, I saw anguish on starving mothers' faces
as they patted and squeezed their flat breasts, trying
to get a little more milk into their weak babies'
mouths. Isaw this unforgettable tragedy in the midst
of tens of thousands of Chinese evacuating on foot
before a ruthless Japanese army during World
War II. Years later, my wife and I stored severalhundred pounds of milk powder while our five
children were small. I believe that parents who fear
the use of nuclear weapons will be glad to bear the
small expense of keeping on hand the emergency
baby foods listed in Table 9.4, below. (More de-
tailed descriptions of these and many other foods,
with instructions for their use, are given in an Oak
Ridge National Laboratory report, Maintaining
Nutritional Adequacy During A Prolonged Food
Crisis, ORNL-5352, 1979. This report may be
purchased for $6.50 from National Technical In-
formation Service, U.S. Department of Commerce,
5385 Port Royal Road, Springfield, Virginia 22161.)
To make a formula adequate for a 24-hour
period, the quantities of instant non-fat dry milk,
vegetable cooking oil, and sugar listed in the "Per
Day" column of Table 9.4 should be added to 4 cups
of safe water. This formula can be prepared daily in
cool weather or when a refrigerator is available.
In warm or hot weather, or under unsanitary con-
ditions, it is safer to make a formula 3 times a day.
To do so, add ]/3 cup plus 2 teaspoons (a little less
than one ounce) of instant non-fat milk powder
to I]) cups (3 pint) of boiled water, and stir
thoroughly. Then add 1tablespoon (about ]/3 ounce,
or 9 grams) of vegetable oil and 2 teaspoons of sugar,
and stir. (If regular bakers' milk powder is used, ]/4
cup is enough when making one-third -of the daily
formula, 3 times a day.) If baby bottles are not at
hand. milk can be spoon-fed to an infant.
Especially during a war crisis, the best and
most dependable food for an infant is mother's
milk--provided the mother is assured an adequate
diet. The possibility of disaster is one more reason
why a mother should nurse her baby for a full year.
Storing additional high-protein foods and fats for
a nursing mother usually will be better insurance
against her infant getting sick or starving than
keeping adequate stocks of baby foods and the
equipment necessary for sanitary feeding after
evacuation or an attack.
To give a daily vitamin supplement to a baby, a
multivitamin pill should be crushed to a fine powder
between two spoons and dissolved in a small amount
of fluid, so that the baby can easily swallow it. If an
infant does not receive adequate amounts of vitamins
A, D, and C, he will develop deficiency symptoms
in I to 3 months, depending on the amounts stored
in his body. Vitamin C deficiency, the first to appear,
can be.prevented by giving an infant 15 mg of
vitamin C each day (about ]/3 of a 50-mg vitamin C
tablet, pulverized) or customary foods containing
vitamin C, such as orange juice. Lacking these
sources, the juice squeezed from sprouted grains
or legumes can be used. If no vitamin pills or foods
rich in vitamin D are available, exposure of the
baby's skin to sunlight will cause his bodyto produce
vitamin D. It would be wise to wait about 30 days
after an attack before exposing the baby to sunlight.
After that, short exposures would be safe except
in areas of extremely heavy fallout. As a further
precaution, the baby can be placed in an open,
shallow pit that will provide shielding from radiation
given off by fallout particles on the ground. Initial
exposure should be very short, no more than
10 minutes.
If sufficient milk is not obtainable, even infants
younger than six months should be given solid food.
Solid foods for babies must be pureed to a fine
Table 9.4. Emergency food supply for one baby.
Ingredients Per Day Per Month Per6 Months
Volumes and Ounces Grams Pounds Kilograms Pounds Kilograms
Instant non-fat dry milk I cup + 2 8 6 2.72 32 15
tablespoons
(2', oz)
Vegetable cooking oil 3 tablespoons 30 2 0.90 12 5.5
(1 oz)
Sugar 2 tablespoons 20 1.3 0.60 8 3.6
(0.7oz)
Standard daily multi-vitamin
I , pill 10pills 60 pills
pillstexture. Using a modern baby food grinder makes
pureeing quick and easy work. Under crisis con-
ditions, a grinder should be cleaned and disinfected
like other baby-feeding utensils, as described later in
this section.
Several expedient methods are available: the
food can be pressed through a' sieve, mashed with
a fork or spoon, or squeezed through a porous cloth.
Good sanitation must be maintained; all foods
should be brought to a boil after pureeing to insure
that the food is safe from bacteria.
A pureed solid baby food can be made by first
boiling together ~ parts of a cereal grain and I part
of beans until they are soft. Then the mixture should
be pressed through a sieve. The sieve catches the
tough hulls from the grain kernels and the skins
from the beans. The grain-beans combination will
provide needed calories and a well-supplemented
protein. The beans also supply the additional iron
that a baby needs by the time he is 6 months old.
Flours made from whole grains or beans, as pre-
viously described, also can be used; however, these
may contain more rough material.
Some grains are preferable to others. It iseasier
to sieve cooked corn kernels than cooked wheat
kernels. Since wheat is the grain most likely to cause
allergies, it should not be fed to an infant until he
is 6 to 7 months old if other grains, such as 'rice or
corn, are available.
Small children also need more protein than can
be supplied by grains alone. As a substitute for milk,
some bean food should be provided at every meal. If
the available diet isdeficient inaconcentratedenergy
source such as fat or sugar, a child's feedings should
be increased to 4 or 5 times a day, to enable him to
assimilate more. Whenever possible, a small child
should have a daily diet that contains at least one
ounce of fat (3 tablespoons, without scraping the
spoon). This would provide more than 10% of a
young child's calories in the form offat, which would
be beneficial.
If under emergency conditions it is not practical
to boil infant feeding utensils, they can be sterilized
with a bleach solution. Add one teaspoon of ordinary
household bleach to a quart of water. (Ordinary
household bleach contains 5.25% sodium hypo-
chlorite as its only active ingredient and supplies
approximately 5% available chlorine. If the strength
of the bleach isunknown, add 3teaspoons per quart.)
Directions for safe feeding without boiling follow:
The Utensils (Include at least one I-quart and one
I-pint mason jar, for keeping prepared
formula sterile until used.)
I. Immediately after feeding, wash the inside
and outside ofall utensilsusedto preparetheformula
and to feed the infant.
2. Fill a covered container with clean, cold
water and add the appropriate amount of chlorine
bleach.
3. Totally immerse all utensils until the next
feeding (3 or 4 hours). Besure that the bottle, ifused,
is filled with bleach solution. Keep container
covered.
At Feeding Time
I. Wash hands before preparing food.
2. Remove utensils trom the disinfectant chlo-
rine solution and drain, but do not rinse or dry.
3. Prepare formula; feed the baby.
4. Immediately after feeding, wash utensils in
clean water and immerse again in the disinfectant
solution.
5. Prepare fresh chlorine solution each day.
STORAGE OF FOODS
Whole grains and white sugar can be stored
successfully for decades; dried beans, non-fat milk
powder, and vegetable oil can be stored for several
years. Some rules for good storage follow:
• Keep food dry. The most dependable way to
assure continuing dryness is to store dry grain in
metal containers, such as ordinary 5-gallon metal
storage cans or 55-gallon metal drums with gasketed
lids. Filled 5-gallon cans are light enough to be easily
carried in an automobile when evacuating.
Particularly in humid areas, grain which seems
to be dry often is not dry enough to store for a long
period. To be sure that grain is dry enough to store
for years, use a drying agent. The best drying agent
for this purpose is silica gel with color indicator.
The gel is blue when it is capable of absorbing water
and pink when it needs to be heated to become aneffective drying agent again. Silica gel is inexpensive if
boughtfrom chemical supply firms located in most cities.
Byheating it in a hot oven or in a can over a fireuntil it
turns blue again, silica gel can be used repeatedly for
years.
The best containers for the silica gel used to dry
grain (or to determine its dryness) are homemade cloth
envelopes large enough for a heapingcupful ofthe gel.A
clear plastic window should be stitched in, through
which color changes can be observed. Put an evelope of
silica gel on top of the grain in a 5-gallon can filled to
within a couple of inches of its top. Then close the can
tightly. Even a rather loose-fitting lid can be sealed
tightly with tape. If after a few days the silica gel is still
blue, the grain isdry enough. Ifthe silica gel has turned
pink, repeat the process with fresh envelopes until it can
be seen that the grain is dry.
• Keep grains and beans free of weevils, other insects,
and rodents. Dry ice(carbondioxide) isthe safest means·
still widely available to the public for ridding grain and
beans of insects. Place about4inches ofdry iceon top of
the grain in a 5-gallon metal container. Put the lid on
somewhat loosely, so that air in the grain can be driven
out of the can. (This willhappen as the dry icevaporizes
and the heavycarbondioxidegassinks into the grain and
displaces the air around the kernels.) After an hour or
two, tighten the lid and seal it with tape. After one
month,all insects inthiscarbon-dioxideatmosphere will
have died from lack of oxygen.
• Store foods in the coolest available place, out of the
light. Rememberthatthe storage lifeof most foods iscut
in half by an increase of 18°F (10°C) in storage
temperature.v Thus 48 months of storage at 52°F is
equivalent to 24 months at 70°F, and to 12months at
88°F.
Illustrative ofthe importance ofcool storageare my
experiences in storing non-fat milk powder in an earth-
covered, cool shelter. In steel drums I stored unopened
lOO-pound bags of compact, non-fat milk powder that I
bought from bakeries. The cost per pound wasmuch less
than I would have paid for the largest packages sold in
supermarkets. After 7 years storage at temperatures of
about 50°F the year around, my milk powder was still
good ~ as good as it would have been if stored in a
normally air-conditioned and heated home for about 3
years.
• Do not place stored metal containers directly on the
floor. To avoid possible condensation of moisture and
the rusting that results, place containers on spaced
boards. For long-term storage in damp permanent
shelters or damp basements, use solid-plasticcontainers
with thick walls.
• Rotate stored foods. Eat the oldest food of each type
and replace it with fresh food. Althoughcookingoiland
non-fat milk powder remain edible after several years of
storage at room temperature, these and most other dry
foods are more nourishing and taste better if stored for
no more than 2years. Most canned foods taste better if
kept no more thanone year. Exceptionsare whole grains
and white sugar, which stay good for decades if stored
properly.
• Storeplentyofsalt.Inourmodernworldsaltis
so abundant and cheap that most Americans do
not realize that in many areas soon after a major
nuclear attack salt would become a hard-to-get
essentialnutrient.Personsworkinghardwithout
salt would suffer cramps and feel exhausted
within a few days. Most famine relief shipments
ofgrainprobablywouldnotincludesalt.Sostore
enough salt both to salt your family's food for
months and to trade for other necessities.
SEEDS
For thousands of years storing seeds has
been an essential part of the survival prepara-
tionsmadebymillionsofprudentpeoplefearing
attack. Seeds are hopes for future food and the
defeat of famine, that lethal follower of disas-
trous wars.
Among the most impressive sounds I ever
heard were faint, distant rattles of small stones,
heard on a quiet, black, freezing night in 1944.
An air raid was expected before dawn. I was
standing on one of the bare hills outside
Kunming, China,tryingtopinpointthe sources
of lights that Japanese agents had used just
before previous air raids to guide attacking
bombers to blacked-out Kunming. Puzzled by
sounds of cautious digging starting at about
2:00 AM, I askedmy interpreterifhe knewwhat
was going on. He told me that farmers walked
most of the night to make sure that no one was
followingthem, andwere buryingsealedjarsof
seeds in secret places, far enough from homesso that probably no one would hear them dig-
ging. My interpreter did not need to tell me that
if the advancing Japanese troops succeeded in
taking Kunming they would ruthlessly strip
the surrounding countryside of all food they
could find. Then those prudent farmers would
have seeds and hope in a starving land.
If you doubt that enough of our current
"oversupply" of stored whole grains, soybeans,
milkpowder,etc. wouldreachyouaftera nuclear
attack, you should store seeds known to grow
well in your area.
Whengettingyoursupply of survivalseeds,
remember:
• Grains andbeans arethebestplantsources
of energy and protein.
• Even if you have enough vitamins for
several months, you may not be able to buy
more until long after a nuclear war.
• The deadly curses of scurvy, vitamin A
deficiencies, and pellagra can be prevented by
eating the plants, seeds, and sprouted seeds
described earlier in this chapter.
• Plants grownfrom hybridseeds givelarger
yields, but do not produce as productive seeds
as do plantsgrownfrom goodnon-hybrid seeds.
• Seeds of proven productivity in your lo-
calitymaybe morevaluablethanmoney after a
major nuclear attack.
• Youshouldgetand storemostlynon-hybrid
seeds, after learning from experienced local
gardeners which are best.Chapter 10
Fallout Radiation Meters
THE CRITICAL NEED
A survivor in a shelter that does not have a
dependable meter to measure fallout radiation-
or that has one but lacks someone who knows how to
useit-willfacea prolonged nightmareofuncertainties:
Human beings cannot feel, smell, taste, hear, or see
fallout radiation. A heavyattack would put most radio
stations offthe air, due to the effectsofelectromagnetic
pulse, blast, fire, or fallout from explosions. Because
fallout intensitiesoftenvarygreatlyovershortdistances,
those stationsstill broadcastingwould rarely beable to
give reliable information concerning the constantly
changingradiationdangersaround asurvivor'sshelter.
Which parts ofthe shelter givethe best protection?
How large isthe radiation dose being received byeach
person? When is it safe to leave the shelter for a few
minutes? When can one leavefor an hour's walk to get
desperately needed water? As the fallout continues to
decay, how long can one safely work each day outside
the shelter? When can the shelter beleftfor good? Only
an accurate, dependable fallout meter will enable
survivors to answer these life-or-death questions'.
Gamma radiation is by far the most dan-
gerous radiation given off by fallout particles.
Gamma rays are like X rays, only more pene-
tratingandharmful.Theroentgen(R) istheunit
most commonly used to measure exposures to
gamma rays, or to X rays, and most American
civil defense instruments give readings in
roentgens (R) or roentgens per hour (R/hr).
Therefore, for simplicity's sake, in this book
almostallradiationdoses are given inroentgens
(R), and radiation dose rates are given in
roentgens per hour (R/hr). This simplification
is justified because, for external whole-body
gamma radiation from fallout, the numerical
valueofanexposure ordose given in roentgens
is approximately the same. as the numerical
value-given in rems or rads. (For information
on the rem and the rad, and on the seriousness
and probability of injuries likely to be suffered
as a result of receiving different sized doses of
gamma radiation, see "Lifetime Risks from
Radiation", a section of Chapter 13.)
The dose (the quantity) of radiation that a
person receives, along with the length of time
during which the dose is received, determine
what injuries, if any, will be suffered as a result
of the dose. Of people who, in a few days, each
receive a dose of 350 roentgens under nuclear
war conditions, about half will die. Doses are
measuredwith smallinstrumentscalleddosim-
eters,eitherbydirectlyreadingthedosebetween
the time atwhich a dosimeteris chargedtoread
zero andthe time of a subsequentreading, orby
calculatingbysubtractionthedose betweentwo
readings. However, to avoid receiving a lethal
orsickeningdose,themostusefulinstrumentis
a dose rate meter. The National Academy of
Sciences'AdvisoryCommitteeon CivilDefense
in 1953 concluded: "The final effectiveness of
shelter depends upon the occupants of any
shelter having simple, rugged, and reliable
doseratemeterstomeasurethefalloutdoserate
outside the shelter."
With a reliable dose rate meter you can
quite quicklydeterminehowgreattheradiation
dangersareindifferentplaces,andthenprompt-
ly act to reduce your exposure to these unseen,
unfelt dangers. For example, if you go outside
anexcellentfallout shelterandlearnbyreading
yourdose rate meterthatyouarebeingexposed
to 30 R/hr, you know that if you stay there for
one hour you will receive a dose of 30 R. But if
you gobackinsideyourexcellentshelterafter2
minutes, then while outside you will have re-
ceived a dose of only 1R. (2 minutes =2/60 of anhour=1/30hr; andreceivinga dose attherateof
30 R/hr for 1/30 hr results in a dose of 30 R/hr x
1/30 hr = lR.) Under nuclear war conditions,
receiving an occasional dose of lR (1,000 milli-
roentgens) would be of little concern, as ex-
plained in Chapter 13 and 18.
WARNINGS FOR BUYERS OF
FALLOUT METERS
You are "on your own" when buying a dose
rate meter or dosimeter because:
• No U.S. Government agency or other Gov-
ernment facility advises the public regarding
sources of the best available radiation-measur-
inginstrumentsfor use in timeofwar, orwarns
concerned individuals that certain instruments
are either incapable of measuring adequately
high dose rates or doses for wartime use, or are
dangerously inaccurate. For example, a dose
rate meter that in 1982 sold nationwide was
testedinthatyearatOakRidge NationalLabora-
tory to determine its accuracy for measuring
gamma radiation. This instrument was reason-
ably accurate at low dose rates, but at the high
dose rates of life or death importance in a
nuclearwar its readings weredangerouslylow:
When it should have read 150 R/hr, it read 13.9
R/hr. Another dose rate meter of this same
model, tested in CaliforniabyDr. BruceClayton,
read only 16 R/hr when it should have read 400
R/hr. Obviously, if this model were used and
trustedby a persondoingrescue workfor hours
outdoors in heavy fallout, while believing that
he was receiving a non-incapacitating dose he
actually would be getting a fatal dose!
• Instrumentsthatmeasureonlymilliroentgen-
range dose rates are sold for war use by some
companies. Since mostAmericanshaveno idea
what size of radiation doses would incapacitate
or kill them, and do not even know that a
milliroentgen is 1/1000 of a roentgen, some
people buy instruments that are capable of
measuring maximum dose rates of only one
roentgen or less per hour. For example, an
American company advertised and sold for
$370.00 in 1986 its dose rate meter that has a
maximum range of "0 - 1000 mR/hr." It is the
onlydose rate meterin thatcompany'slistingof
"Radiation Detection Products for the General
Public", described as" ... applicable for use in
case of nuclear war." The highest dose rate that
itcan measure, one roentgen per hour, is far too
low to be of much use in a nuclear war.
• Used and surplus dose rate meters and dosi-
meters are likely to be inaccurate or otherwise
unreliable. Very few buyers have access to a
radiation source powerful enough to check in-
strumentsfor accuracyovertheirfull rangesof
measurements.Myeducationregardingbargain
fallout meters began in 1961, after I bought two
dosimeters of a model then beingproduced by a
leadingmanufacturingcompanyand purchased
in quantity by the Office of Civil Defense.
Withina weekafterreceivingtheseinstruments,
one ofthemcouldnotbe charged. The otherwas
found to be inaccuate. Later I learned that the
manufacturing company sold to the public its
instruments that did not pass Government
quality tests.
Most Federal and State organizations do
not criticize faulty civil defense products, ap-
parentlybecausetheyare notcharged withthis
responsibilityandwanttoavoidangeringmanu-
facturers and sellers who may go to their Con-
gressmen orLegislators to seekredressforlost
sales.
In this book I am not giving the names of
any of the companies that sell or have sold
potentially life-endangeringsurvival items. To
do so would reduce the chances of this book
being distributed or advocated by Government
agencies.
WAR RESERVES OF FALLOUT METERS
One of Americans' most important assets
for surviving a' nuclear war is the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA's)
supply of fallout meters. These instruments
include approximately 600,000 dose rate meters
and about 3,300,000 dosimeters, all suitable for
wartime use. In 1986 almost all of these old
instruments-thatcanbe found-reportedlystill
are in good working condition. Because ofcon-
tinuing inadequate funding for civil defense, in
. recent years most of FEMA's instruments have
been serviced, calibrated, and, if necessary,
repaired only once every four years. In a few
localitiestheseinstrumentsareno longerbeing
serviced.
Most of these critically important instru-
ments are keptin cities,in buildings likelyto be
destroyed by blast or fire in the event of a
massive Soviet attack. If there were a suffi-
ciently long, officially recognized period of
warning before an attack, it might be possible
during such a worsening crisis to move a large
fraction of thesefallout metersoutsidethe areas
of probable blast or fire damage, and to place
them in officially designated fallout shelters.
However, this unlikely development would not
provide private family shelters with instru-
ments.
Mostfamilies needtheirownfallout meters.
This need is greatest for families living inlocalitiesnotlikelytobedamagedbyblastorfire,
and for those planning to evacuate to such less
hazardous localities during a worsening crisis.
COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE
FALLOUT METERS
In 1987 an American does not have many
choices if he wants to buy an off-the-shelf dose
rate meter suitable for measuring the high
levelsoffallout radiationthat wouldresultfrom
a nuclear attack. Although inexpensive dose
rate meters and dosimeters have been under
development by the military services and civil
defense researchers for the past 15 years, they
have not been produced commercially for sale
to the public. Field tests of factory-produced
modelshav.e not been completedatthis writing.
Dose Rate Meters
The best radiation-measuring instrument
for wartimeuse availableinthe United Statesin
1987 is the Universal Survey Meter RD-l0,
manufactured in Finland by Alnor Oy. It is sold
in the United States by a subsidiary, Alnor
Nuclear,2585 WashingtonRoad, Suite 120, Pitts-
burg, Pennsylvania 15241. In 1988 the FOB-
price, pre-paid, is$1,100.00. TheRD-l0accurate-
ly measures gamma and X raysfrom veryclose
to natural background radiation up to 300 R/hr,
in two ranges (0.03 - 300 mR/hr, and 0.03 - 300
R/hr). It meets Finnish Army standards for
ruggedness and accurate operation in sub-zero
cold (down to -25°C, or -13°F); it has an illumi-
nated scale for night use and an audible pulse
rate signal, and is built to withstand electro-
magnetic pulse (EMP) effects. (A few of my
friends and I for years have owned Finnish
instruments of an earlier model, the RD-8; they
still are in excellent working condition.)
A less expensive dose rate meter designed
for ruggedwartimeuseisthe Portable Radiolog-
icalDoseRate MeterPDRM82, manufacturedin
England by Plessey Controls Limited, Sopers
Lane, Poole, Dorset BH17 7ER, England. This
instrument is the current standard issue of the
British armed forces and civil defense, is de-
signed for a storage life of at least 20 years, is
microcomputer controlled, EMP-proof, and dis-
plays "FAIL" if a fault exists. (Like all instru-
ments, occasionally a PDRM 82 does fail. One
bought by a friend in 1987 and tested by a radia-
tion laboratory in Utah read 86 centigrays per
hour when it should have read 300, and failed to
display"FAIL." Mailedbackto England,Plessey
Controls finally replaced it with another new
PDRM82.)Theonlyconsequentialdisadvantages
of the PDRM 82, compared to more expensive
dose rate meters, are that it reads in centigrays
per hour (cGy/hr is equivalent to Rads/hr, or
R/hr)anddoes notmeasuredose rateslowerthan
0.1 cGy/hr (100 mR/hr). In 1987 this portable,
four-digit-liquid-display dose rate meteris sold
by Plessey Controls for 250 Brrtish pounds plus
air shipment charges - all pre-paid. To learn
the latest delivery date and the latest price
delivered direct by air, write Plessey Controls.
However, in a nuclear war 100 mR/hr will be a
low dose rate in most life-threatening fallout
areas. (I boughta PDRM82 directfrom England
in 1984, my objective being to have it tested at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory. I later learned
that such testing was unnecessary, since U.S.
Army specialists already had tested the PDRM
82 and had found it excellent.)
Technical Note. Conversion of readings of
mostforeign andscientificradiation-monitoring
instrumentsto the radiationunits usually given
by American civil defense instruments, or used
inthe U.S. inregulationsandarticlesconcerning
radiation hazards:
ABSORBED RADIATION DOSE
1 gray (1 Gy) =100 Rads
1 centigray (1 cGy) = 1 Rad
(As explained in the first section ofthis
chapter,for practicalcivildefense work
1 Rad = 1 roentgen = 1 Rem.)
DOSE EQUIVALENT
1 sievert (1 Sv) =100 Rems
1 millisievert (1 mSv) =0.1 Rem
ACTIVITY
1 bequerel (1 Bq) =27 picocuries
(Radiation contamination of milk and
water are given in picocuries per liter,
or bequerels per liter. One picocurie is
one millionth of one millionth of a
curie: 1curieis37,000,000,000bequerels.)
No wonder that most newspaper and tele-
vision accounts of radiation accidents and
hazards are confused!
I have not been able to find an American-
made, modern dose rate meter that is designed
for wartime use and is being sold in 1987.
Among those designed for peacetime use that
may be satisfactory in wartime is the RO-2A
manufactured by Eberline, P.O. Box2108, Santa
Fe, New Mexico 87504-2108. The RO-2A is a
portable air ionization-chamber instrument
used to measure beta, gamma, and X-ray radia-
tion from 50 mR/hrto50 R/hr. The price in 1987
is$950.00. InEberline's summary specifications
and in the specifications that I have read of
otherU.S. manufacturersofdose rate meters, no
mention is made of the instruments' being
EMP-proof.
Dosimeters
Several reliable dosimeters and dosimeter-
chargers are sold in the United States. Among
the establishedretailsources is DosimeterCor-
poration,P.O. Box42377, Cincinnati, Ohio45242.
Its DCA Model No. 686 measures accumulated
dosesfrom 0to600 R, andinJanuaryof1986 sold
for $59.95. The battery powered charger, DCA
Model No. 909, cost $90.00; one charger can be
used to charge several dosimeters.A more expensive direct reading 600 R
dosimeter is model 019-006 of Atomic Products
Corporation, P.O. Box 1157, Center Moriches,
New York 11934. It sells for $120.00; dosimeter
charger 020-001, " ... used to 'zero' all Direct-
Reading Dosimeters", costs $98.00.
Tokeepthemdependable, allcommercially
available dosimeters and dose rate meters
should be (1) kept supplied with fresh batteries
for charging or operating, (2) checked with a
strong enough radiation source (at no longer
than 3-year intervals) to see if they still are
measuringradiationaccurately,and(3)repaired
if necessary. (To learn whether a dose rate
meter still is functioning, use a radioactive
check source such as Dosimeter Corporation's
Check Source (Model 3001), that eontains 5
microcuries cesium-137 and sells for $35.00.
Thistype of checktestwill proveonlythatyour
instrument measures dose rates slightly above
normal background radiation; it will not prove
that your instrument could accurately measure
the much higher dose rates that will be of vital
concern in a nuclear war. Some instrument
companies will properly calibrate a radiation
measuring instrument that is sent to them. For
example, DosimeterCorporationcharges$50.00
to calibrate a dose rate meter or dosimeter, and
makes needed repairs at an additional cost.)
The reader is advised to buy at least a good
commercial dose rate meter, with which to
quickly measurehighlevels of fallout radiation
-if he can afford one. A family that has a
reliable dose rate meter, and that remains in a
shelter almost all of the time during which
fallout dose rates outdoors are dangerously
high, can calculate with sufficient accuracy the
accumulated dosesreceivedby itsmembers. To
do this, a continuousrecordmustbekeptofdose
ratesandthetimesatwhichthosemeasurements
are made. (Having a reliable dosimeter elimi-
natestheneedfor keepingsuchdetailedrecords
and making these calculations, but if only one
instrument can be afforded it should be a dose
rate meter.) A good commercial instrument, if
properlymaintainedandperiodicallycalibrated
with a radiation source to check its accuracy,
probably will be serviceable for years.
A prudent owner of even an excellent dose
rate meter would do well to make and learn to
use a KFM, the dependable homemakeable fall-
outmeterbrieflydescribedlaterinthis chapter,
withcompleteinstructionsfor makingandusing
it given in Appendix C. Then during a period of
heavy warfallout youcan checkthereadings of
your complex instrument by comparing them
with those of your KFM, and, if the complex
instrument is giving inaccurate readings, your
KFM will meet your basic need.
A HOMEMAKEABLE DOSE RATE METER,
THEKFM
• What is a KFM?
The only do-it-yourselffallout meterthat is
accurate and dependable was invented in 1977.
Itis calledthe KFM (KearnyFalloutMeter);one
is pictured in Fig. 10.1.
Fig. 10.1. A homemade KFM, an accurate dose
rate meter for measuring dose rates from 30 mR/hr
(0.03 R/ hr) up to 43 R/ hr.
This simple instrument has undergone
rigorous scientific testing in several laborato-
ries, including Oak Ridge National Laboratory;
its accuracy and dependability were confirmed.
Many hundreds of KFMs have been made by
untrained people, ranging from members of
junior high school science classes to grand-
mothers making them for their children and
grandchildren. These successful makers have
been guided only by thoroughly field-tested
instructions and patterns not quite as good as
the improved ones given in Appendix C of this
updated book.
Only common materials found in millions
ofhomes areneededto builda KFM. (Ifallofthe
materials, including those for a dry-bucket,
have to be purchased, their total cost in 1986 is
lessthan seventeendollars.)TheKFMservesas
an accurate dose rate meter when used in con-
junction with a watch and the KFM's attached
table relatingchangesinreadingsinlistedtime
intervals to dose rates. No radiation source isneeded either to initially calibrate a KFM or
subsequently to check its accuracy. (Calibra-
tionsfor accuracywerecompleted atOakRidge
National Laboratory and are the basis of the
KFM's attached table.) A KFM is more accurate
than most civil defense instruments, and its
accuracy is permanently established by the
laws of physics applicable to the specified
dimensionsandothercharacteristicsofitsparts,
and to their positioning relative to each other-
providedthatitismadeand maintainedaccord-
ingto the instructions. Unlike all factory-made
radiation measuring civil defense instruments
that are reliable and available today, a KFM is
charged electrostatically. No battery is needed.
• Additional Advantages of KFMs
* A KFM combines the provenly practical
radiation measuring functions of an electro-
scope and of an ionization chamber having a
specified volume. Electroscopes were the basic
radiationmeasuringinstruments used by scien-
tists' includingNobelLaureateLord Rutherford,
who pioneered studies of atomic nuclei and
radiations. The author is indebted to another
Nobel Laureate physicist, Dr. Luis W. Alvarez,
forthe ideaofmakinga homemadeelectroscope
with two thread-suspended, aluminum-foil
leaves, to measure fallout radiation. Many ex-
cellent and unavoidably expensive dose rate
meters, includingcivildefense instruments, are
ionization chamber devices.
* A KFM, used in conjunction with a
watch, does not have to be charged to any
specified initial reading, or discharged by ex-
posureto radiationtoanyspecifiedfinal reading,
to accurately measure the dose rate during a
time intervalspecified on its attachedtable. Fig.
10.2 illustrates this operational advantage of
KFMs.
ORNL-DWG 76-6548
o
o 20016080 120
GAMMA DOSE (mR)
40
ADJUSTED CALIBRATION CURVES OF KFM 20 G AND KFM 20 1
(BOTH HAVE 8-PLY LEAVES OF STANDARD ALUMINUM FOIL)
THE CALIBRATION READINGS HAVE ALL BEEN ADJUSTED
GRAPHICALLY TO SIMULATE ALL INITIAL LEAF SEPARATIONS
*
BEING EQUAL
A 0= KFM 201 AT 2.5 R/hr, 60 sec EXPOSURES
0 A = KFM 201 AT 2.0 R/hr, 60 sec EXPOSURES
x= KFM 20 GAT 2.5 R/hr, 60 sec EXPOSURES
A 0= KFM 20G AT 2.0 R/hr, 60 sec EXPOSURES
*= KFM 20 G AT 10.0 R/hr, 30 sec EXPOSURES
0 0
A X
0
0 A
10
* 0 A
2
6
8
4
EE
(f)
w
;:; 20
w
-.J
l.L.. 18
o
~ 16oo
w 14a::w
3: 12o-.J
~ 10
zo
i=<:[
Q::
Ci:
W
(f)
ow
>Q::
W
(f)
lD
o
Fig. 10.2 Normalized Calibration Points for Two KFMs, Showing the Straight-Line
Relationship Between Milliroentgen Radiation DOSES and Resultant Readings. The
complete instructions for making and using a KFM (see Appendix C) explain how an
operator with a watch can use this instrument to accurately measure DOSE RATES.• Additional Information on Accuracy
and Dependability
* Readers who want additional technical
information on the KFM are advised to buy a
copyof theoriginalOakRidge National Labora-
tory report on this instrument, The KFM, A
Homemade Yet Accurate and Dependable Fallout
Meter (ORNL-5040, CORRECTED), by Cresson
H. Kearny, Paul R. Barnes, Conrad V. Chester,
andMargaretW.Cortner. Date published: Janu-
ary 1978.Copiesaresoldbythe NationalTechni-
cal Information Service, U.S. Department of
Commerce, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield,
Virginia 22161. Since the price continues to
increase, it is best to write first, to learn the
postage-paid cost.
* Civil defense professionals of foreign
countries also have concluded that KFMs have
lifesavingpotential.TheJune 1978SpecialIssue
of The Journal of the Institute of Civil Defence
("The Premier Society of Disaster Studies",
with headquarters in London) was entirely
devoted to the KFM, and gave international
distribution to the original complete instruc-
tions and cut-outpaperpatterns. The interestof
Chinese civil defense officials in the KFM and
my otherlow costsurvivalinventions ledtomy
making, with White House approval, two long
trips in China as an official guest. In eight
Chinesecities I acquired survival know-how by
exchanging civil defense information with top
civil defense officials.
• A Major Disadvantage: A KFM
Looks Like a Toy
*. This instrument appears too simple to
be trusted to measure deadlyradiation, a fright-
eningmysteryto mostpeople. Typicalmoderns .
are accustomedto pushingbuttons andtwisting
dials to get information instantly from instru-
ments they do not understand. Most feel that a
dependable radiation-monitoring instrument
has to be complex. However, especially during
a worseningnuclearcrisis manytypical Ameri-
cans would build KFMs if they become con-
vinced of the accuracy anddependabilityof this
homemakeable instrumentthattheycan under-
stand, use intelligently, and repairif necessary.
• Caution: Earlier versions of KFM-making
instructions, written when common sewing
threads were good insulators, recommend
sewing threads for suspendmg a KFM's leaves.
Nowmostsewingthreadsare anti-statictreated,
are poor insulators, and are unsatisfactory for
use in KFMs. Makers of KFMs should use the
instructionsinthisupdatededition,thatrecom-
mend widely available, excellent insulatorsfor
suspendinga KFM'sleaves,andthatincorporate
several field-tested design improvements.
• Instructions for Making and Using KFMs
Appendix C gives the latest field-tested
instructions (with patterns) to enable you to
make a KFM and to learn how to use it.
Thegreatneedforcivildefenseinstruments
is likely to be fully recognized only during a
worsening nuclear crisis. Therefore, in this
edition the KFM instructions and patterns are
printed on only one side of a sheet, with extra
patterns at the end of the text, and with two
pages at the very end to expedite the rapid
reproduction of the KFM instructions. Timed
printing tests by two newspapers have proved
that, with the help of these two pages of special
instructions, a newspaper can paste up and
photograph all pages of the KFM instructions,
print a 12-page tabloid giving them, and start
distributing the tabloid-all in less than one
hour. Thus, if you have a copy of this book
during an all-too-possible nuclear crisis, you
may be able to give these instructions to a
newspaper and help thousands of your fellow
citizensobtainthe informationthattheyneedto
make fallout meters for themselves.
• Advice on Building a KFM
The readerisurged to setaside several hours inthe
near future for making a KFM and for mastering its
use. Duringfield tests, average Americanfamilies have
needed about 6 hours to study the instructions given in
Appendix C, to make this simple instrument, and to
learn how to use it. These several hours may not be
available in the midst of a crisis. Higher priority work
would be the building of a high-protection-factor
shelter, the making of a shelter-ventilating pump, and
the storing ofadequate water. In a crisisitmight not be
possible to obtain some needed materials for a KFM.
It is very difficult to concentrate on unfamiliar
details during a nerve-racking crisis, or to do delicate
work with hands that may become unsteady. The best
time to build and learn to use a KFM is in peacetime,
long before a crisis. Then this long-lasting instrument
should be stored for possible future need.Chapter 11
Light
THE NEED FOR MINIMUM LIGHT
Numerous disasters have proved that many
people can remain calm for several days in total
darkness. But some occupants of a shelter ful1 of
fearful people probably would go to pieces if they
could see nothing and could not get out. It iseasy to
imagine the impact of a few hysterical people on the
other occupants of a pitch-dark shelter. Under
wartime conditions, evena faint light that shows only
the shapes of nearby people and things can make the
difference between an endurable situation and a
black ordeal.
Figure 11.1 shows what members of the Utah
family saw in their shelter on the third night of
occupancy. Al1 of the family's flashlights and other
electric lights had been used until the batteries were
almost exhausted. They had no candles at home and
Fig. 11.1. Night scene In a trench shelter
without light.
failed to bring the cooking oil, glass jar, and cotton
string included in the Evacuation Checklist. These
materials would have enabled them to make an
expedient lamp and to keep a smal1 light burning
continuously for weeks, if necessary.
At 2 AM on the third night, the inky blackness
caused the mother, a stable woman who had never
feared the dark, to experience her first claustro-
phobia. In a control1ed but tense voice she suddenly
awoke everyone by stating: "I have to get out of here.
I can't orient myself." Fortunately for the shelter-
occupancy experiment, when she reached the entry
trench she.overcame her fears and lay down to sleep
on the floor near the entrance.
Conclusion: In a crisis, it isespecial1y bad not to
be able to see at all.
ELECTRIC LIGHTS
Even in communities outside areas of blast, fire,
or fallout, electric lights dependent on the public
power system probably would fail. Electromagnetic
pulse effects produced bythe nuclearexplosions, plus
the destruction of power stations and transmission
lines, would knock out most public power.
No emergency lights are included in the supplies
stocked in official' shelters. The flashlights and
candles that some people would bring to shelters
probably would be insufficient to provide minimum
light for more than a very few days.
A low-amperage light bulb used with a large dry
cel1 battery or a car battery is an excel1ent source of
low-level continuous light. One of the smal1 12-volt
bulbs in the instrument panels of cars with 12-volt
batteries wil1 give enough light for 10 to 15 nights,without discharging a car battery so much that it
cannot be used to start a car.
Making an efficient battery-powered lighting
system for your shelter is work best done before a
crisis arises. During a crisis you should give higher
priority to many other needs.
Things to remember about using small bulbs
with big batteries:
• Always use a bulb of the same voltage as the
battery.
• Use a small, high-resistance wire, such as bell
wire, with a car ~attery.
• Connect the battery after the rest of the
improvised light circuit has been completed.
• Use reflective material such as aluminum foil,
mirrors, or white boards to concentrate a weak light
where it is needed.
• If preparations are made before a crisis, small
12-volt bulbs (0.1 to 0.25 amps) with socketsand wire
can be bought at a radio partsstore. Electric test clips
for connecting thin wire to a car battery can be
purchased at an auto parts store.
CANDLES AND COMMERCIAL LAMPS
Persons going to a shelter should take all their
candles with them, along with plenty of matches in a
waterproof container such as a Mason jar. Fully
occupied shelters can become so humid that matches
not kept in moisture-proof containers cannot be
lighted after a single day.
Lighted candles and other fires should be placed
near the shelter opening through which air is leaving
the shelter, to avoid buildup of slight amounts of
carbon monoxide and other headache-causinggases.
If the shelter is completely closed fora time for any
reason, such as to keep out smoke from a burning
house nearby, all candlesand otherfires inthe shelter
should be extinguished.
Gasoline and kerosene lamps should not be
taken inside a shelter. They produce gases that can
cause headaches or even death. If gasoline or
kerosene lamps are knocked over, as by blast winds
that would rush into sheltersoverextensiveareas, the
results would be disastrous.
SAFE EXPEDIENT LAMPS FOR SHELTERS
The simple expedient lamps described below are
the results of Oak Ridge National Laboratory
experiments which started withoil lamps of the kinds
used by Eskimos and the ancient Greeks. Our
objective was to develop safe, dependable, long-
lasting shelter lights that can be made quickly, using
only common household materials. Numerous field
tests have proved that average Americans can build
good lamps byfollowing the instructions given below
(Fig. 11.2).
These expedient lamps have the following
advantages:
• They are safe. Even ifa burning lamp isknocked
over onto a dry paper, the flame issosmallthat itwill
be extinguished if the lamp fuel being burned is a
cooking oil or fat commonly used in the kitchen, and
if the lamp wick is not much larger than 1/16 inch in
diameter.
• Since the flame isinside ajar, it isnot likely to set
fire to a careless person's clothing or to be blown out
by a breeze.
• With the smallest practical wick and flame, a
lamp burns only about I ounce of edible oil or fat in
eight hours.
• Even with a flame smallerthanthat ofa birthday
candle, there is enough light for reading. To read
easily by such a small flame, attach aluminum foil to
three sides and the bottom of the lamp, and suspend it
between you and your book, just high enough not to
block your vision. (During the long, anxious days
and nights spent waiting for fallout to decay, shelter
occupants willappreciate havingsomeone read aloud
to them.)
• A lamp with aluminum foil attached is an
excellent trap for mosquitoes and other insects that
can cause problems in an unscreened shelter. They
are attracted to the glitteringlight and fall intothe oil.
• Two of these lamps can be made in less than an
hour, once the materials have been assembled, so
there is no reason to wait until a crisis arises to make
them. Oil exposed to the air deteriorates, so it is best
not to store lamps filled with oil or to keep oil-soaked
wicks for months.ORNL OWG 71-7241R
GLASS JAR
OIL
SURFACE
WHEN NOT IN
USE FOR DAYS,
KEEP WOOD
OUT OF OIL
WARNING
DO NOT USE KEROSENE,
DIESEL FUEL, OR GAS-
OLINE - USE ONLY FATS
OR OILS OF THE KINDS
FOUND IN THE KITCHEN.
-- LOOP TO HANG LAMP
(LARGE ENOUGH FOR FINGER)
Yl6- in,
WICK OF THIN COTTON
STRING OR TWISTED
COTTON THREADS-
SNUG WICK HOLE CAN
BE DRILLED WITH KNIFE
POINT FROM BOTH SIDES.
ATTACH ALUMINUM FOIL
213 AROUND JAR AND
~NDER IT'S BOTTOM AND
TO THE WIRES,TO ACT
AS A REFLECTOR
(NOT ILLUSTRATED)
FILL JAR NO MORE
THAN HALF-FULL
WITH COOKING OIL
OR FAT
MAKE NOTCH IN BLOCK BY
FIRST SAWING 5 EVEN
CUTS TO DEPTH, THEN
WHITTLE OUT NOTCH
Z'/2-In-LONG SOFT PINE BLOCK,
OR Yrln SHORTER TnAN THE
INNER DIAMETER OF JAR
;/r/\.3/e\{\·
r;"~'" TNJ
;/IJ,I'{\
t.
CLEAN GLASS JAR
FREE OF LABELS
ORNL DWG 71-7240R
TO LIGHT LAMP, FIRST
MAKE MATCH LONGER
BY TAPING OR TYING
IT TO A STICK.
TO EXTINGUISH, DRIP
OIL ON WICK.
FLAME FROM END
!I OF WICK IS JUST
ABOVE OIL SURFACE
LIGHT WIRE
LOOP TO HANG LAMP
(LARGE ENOUGH FOR FINGER)
A FINE WIRE TIED IN
ITS CENTER AROUND
THE NAILS, WITH THE
ENDS OF THE WIRE
WOUND IN OPPOSITE
DIRECTIONS AROUND
-~"'Jy.' ," THE COTTON-ST'RING-" .x / .I WICK, USE COTTON
;;"~ .: THAT IS SLIGHTLY
LESS THAN 'la-in,
t IN DIAMETER. USE
~
" WINDOW SCREEN
WIRE OR OTHER
EQUALLY FINE WIRE.
KEEP EXTRA WIRE AND
WICK-STRING IN SHELTER
FILL JAR NO MORE
THAN HALF -FULL
WITH COOKING OIL
OR FAT
FOR A REFLECTOR,
ATTACH ALUMINUM FOIL
TWOTHIRDS OF THE WAY
AROUND JAR (LEAVING
ONE THIRD UNCOVERED)
AND UNDER ITS BOTTOM.
AND TO THE WIRES. (FOIL
IS NOT ILLUSTRATED.)
WARNING
DO NOT USE KEROSENE,
DIE~FUEL, OR GAS-
OLINE - USE ONLY FATS
OR OILS OF THE KINDS
FOUND IN THE KITCHEN.
BENT NAIL, TIED
OVER TOP OF ANOTHER
BENT NAIL, SO THE
BASE WILL NOT ROCK .,,--~
USE NAILS ABOUT Y2-ln-
SHORTER THAN THE
DIAMETER OF JAR _
WIRE-STIFFENED-WICK LAMP FLOATING WICK LAMP
Fig. 11.2. Safe expedient lamps.Chapter 12
Shelter Sanitation and Preventive Medicine
AN OUNCE OF PREVENTION
Should fallout force Americans to stay crowded
into basements and expedient shelters for days or
weeks, they should protect themselves against the
spread of infectious diseases by taking both
accustomed and unaccustomed preventive measures.
Thousands of our jungle infantrymen in World
War II learned to practice many of the health-
preserving techniques described in this chapter. If
modern medical facilities were temporarily unavail-
able, the prevention of diseases would become much
more important to all of us.
The following infection-preventing measuresare
simple, practical, and require some self-discipline.
The author has observed their practice and has used
them while exploring and soldiering in a number of
jungle, desert, and mountain regions. Ialso have used
these measures while field-testing nuclear war
survival skills in several states.
Basic first aid also would be of increased
importance during a major confrontation or war.·
Good first aid booklets and instructionsare available
in practically all communities, so most first aid
information will not be repeated here.
DISPOSAL OF HUMAN WASTES
To preserve health and morale in a shelter
without a toilet or special chemicals for treatment of
excrement and urine, human wastes should be
removed before they produce much gas. A garbage
can with a lid or a bucketcovered with plasticwillnot
hold the pressurized gas produced by rotting
excrement. The following expedient means of
disposal are listed in increasingorder of effectiveness.
• Use a 5-gallon paint can, a bucket, or a large
waterproof wastebasket to collect both urine and
excrement. Use and keep it near the air-exhaust end
of the shelter. Keep it tightlycovered when not inuse;
a piece of plastic tied over the top keeps out insects
and reduces odors. When such waste containers are
full or begin to stink badly while covered, put them
outside the shelter-still covered to keep out flies.
For some people, especially the aged, bringing a
toilet seat from home would be justified. Padding on
the edge of the bucketalso helps those who have to sit
down. An improvised seat of plywood or board
serves well.
If only one container is available and is almost
filled, periodically dump the wastes outside-unless
fallout is still being deposited. Before an anticipated
attack, people who plan to stay in a sheltershould dig
a waste-disposal pit if they do not have sufficient
waste containers for weeks of shelter occupancy. The
pit should be located about 3 feet from the shelter in
the down-wind direction. This usually will be the air
exhaust end of an earth-covered shelter. The pit
should be surrounded by a ring of mounded, packed
earth about 6 inches high, to keep surfacewater from
heavy rains from running into it.
Quickly putting or dumping wastes outside is
not hazardous once fallout is no longer being
deposited. For example, assume the shelter is in an
area of heavy fallout and the dose rate outside is
400 R/hr-enough to give a potentially fatal dose in
about an hour to a person exposed in the open. Ifa
person needs to be exposed for only 10 seconds to
dump a bucket, in this 1/360th of an hour he will
receive a dose of only about I R. Under war condi-
tions, an additional I-R dose isof little concern. Iftheshelter design does not permit an occupant to dispose
of wastes without running outside, he can tie cloth or
plastic over his shoes before going out, and remove
these coverings in the entry before going back inside
the shelter room. This precaution will eliminate the
chance of tracking "hot" fallout particles into the
shelter, and the small chance of someone getting a
tiny beta burn in this way.
• Have all occupants only urinate in the bucket,
and defecate into a piece of plastic. Urine contains
few harmful organisms and can be safely dumped
outside.
Two thicknesses ofthe thin plastic used to cover
freshly drycleaned clothes will serve to hold bowel
movements of several persons. Gather the plastic
around the excrement to form a bag-like container.
Tie the plastic closed near its upperedges with a string
or narrow strip of cloth. Do not tie it so tightly as to
be gas-tight. Each. day's collection should be gently
tossed outside. As the excrement rots, the gas will
leak out of the tied end of the plastic covering. Flies
will be attracted in swarms, but they will not be able
to get into the plastic to contaminate their feet or to
lay eggs. And because rotting excrement is so
attractive to flies, shelter occupants will be bothered
less by these dangerous pests.
If you have prudently kept a can ofmodern
fly bait in your survival supplies, a little
sprinkled on top ofthe plastic covering can kill
literally thousands of flies. The most effective
fly baits, such as Die Fly and Improved Golden
Malrin, are sold in farm supply stores.
.• Use a hose-vented, 5-gallon can or bucket lined
with a heavy plastic bag; cover tightly with plastic
when not in use. Figure 12.1 shows this type of
expedient toilet.
The vent-hose runs through a hole near the top
of the paint can shown and istaped to seal it to the
can. Such a hole can be quite easily cut with a chisel or
a sharpened screwdriver. The hose is long enough to
extend outside the shelter. Its outer end should be
secured about 6 inches aboveground level, to prevent
water from running into it during a heavy rain. When
a toilet-can is tightly covered, foul gases can escape
through the hose to the outdoors.
With its opening tied shut, a large plastic trash
bag containing as much as 30pounds of wastes can be
lifted out of a toilet-can and disposed of outside the
shelter.
The 6-member Utah family described in preced-
ing chapters used a home-like expedient toiletduring
their 77-hour shelter stay. Figure 12.2 pictures the
toilet seat they took with them, placed on a hose-
Fig. 12.1. A 5-gallon paint can used for a hose-
vented toilet-can, with a plastic trash bag for its
removable liner.
vented container in a hole in the ground. The toilet
was at one end ofthe shelter. A person sitting on this
toilet could put his feet in the adjacent "stand-up
hole" aoR be more comfortable.
The blanket shown hanging on the left in
Fig. 12.2 could be drawn in front of the toilet for
privacy. Behind the girl's head was the emergency
crawlway-ventilation trench. When the toilet was
being used, the shelter-ventilating KAP pumped air
under the blanket-curtain and out the ventilation
trench, resulting in very little odor in the rest of the
shelter.
Vomiting is certain to cause both morale and
health problems, especially for unprepared shelter
occupants fearing this first dramatic symptom of
radiation sickness. Nervousness, combined with the
effects of unaccustomed food and water, will cause
even some healthy persons to vomit. In a crowded
shelter, the sight and smell ofvomit will make others
throw up. Plastic bags, well distributed throughout a
shelter, are the best means to catch vomit and keep itFig. 12.2. The hose-vented expedienttoiletused
by the Utah family for over3days. (The unconnected
telephone was brought along as a joke.)
off the floor. Buckets, pots, or a newspaper folded
into a cone also will serve.
DISPOSAL OF DEAD BODIES
In large shelters which are occupied for many
days, someone may die even when no occupants have
been injured by blast, fire, or radiation. The sight or
the sickly-sweet stink of a decaying human pody is
greatly disturbing. Some civil defense workers have
theorized that the best way to take care of a corpse in
a shelter until the fallout dose-rate outdoors is low
enough to allow burial is to seal it in a large plastic
bag. A simple test with a dead dog proved this idea
impractical: gas pressurecaused the bag to burst. One
solution is to put the corpse outside as soon as the
odor is evident. First, if possible, place it in a bag
made of large plastic trash bags taped together and
perforated with a few pinholes.
CLEAN WATER AND FOOD
Disinfecting water by boiling (preferably for at
least 10 minutes) or by treating it with chlorine or
iodine has been described in Chapter 8, Water.
When water is first stored, it should be dis-
infected by the addition of I scant teaspoon of
ordinary household bleach for each 10 gallons.
To avoid contaminating water when removing
small quantities from a container such as a
waterproofbag, the simplestway isfirst to pour some
into a pot or other medium-sized container, from
which small amounts can be poured into individual
cups. Dipping water with a cup runs more risk of
contamination. The cleanest way to take small
quantities of water out of a container is to siphon it
with a flexible tube, as described in Chapter8, Water.
Sanitary storage of food in expedient shelters is
often difficult. Although almost any paper or plastic
covering will keep fallout particles from food, shelter
dampness can cause paper containers to break. Ants,
roaches, and weevils can cut through paper or plastic
coverings to reach food inside. Placing paper
containers offood in plastic bags and suspending the
bags from the ceiling of the shelter entryway gives
good protection against bugs, and quitegood protec-
tion against moisture for a few weeks. (Do not
obstruct the air flow through an entryway if heat isa
problem.) A small amount of insect repellent or
grease smeared on the suspending string or wire will
stop all crawlers. Metal and strong plastic containers
with tight lids protect food best.
The hygienic preparation and serving of food in
a shelter, especially in hot weather, require that all
cooked food beeaten promptly. It isbest to eatwithin
half-an-hour after cooking. Canned foods should be
consumed shortly after opening. The cleaning and
disinfecting of utensils, bowls, etc., should be done
promptly, to prevent bacteria from multiplying and
to lessen the chances of ants and other insects being
attracted into the shelter. Sugarshould be mixed with
cereals in the cooking pot, to avoid spilling.
In Oak Ridge National Laboratory shelter tests,
only a few infants and toddlers have been included
among the occupants. Feeding infants and small
children over a piece of plastic would be one good
way to keep the inevitablespillagefrom complicating
shelter life.
To avoid using dishes, most foods can be served
on squares of plastic. Spoons and such plastic"dishes" can be licked clean after eating. then
disinfected by boiling or by dipping them into
chlorine bleach solution containing one tablespoon
of Clorox-type bleach to a quart of water.
A shelter occupant without a spoon can cat very
thick grain mush in a sanitary manner by placing it on
a piece of plastic held in his hand. forming it into a
ball. and taking bites. Although Chinese peasants
often eat wet-rice balls held in their bare hands.
experiments have indicated not unexpectedly
that Americans 00 not like to eat this way.
Cooking without oil or fat makes disinfecting
utensils much easier when water and fuel arc being
conserved. Cereals and sugar arc easy to wash off
with a little water. without soap.
CONTROL OF INSECTS
Insect sprays used in high-protection-factor
shelters are likely 'to cause more problems than they
eliminate. Poisonous insecticides should be used with
caution. Insect repellents on the skin and clothing are
generally helpful. but not likely to be in sufficient
supply to last for weeks or months. Some insect
problems and simple means ofcontrolling them are
described below.
Mosquitoes would multiply rapidly afteran attack.
because normal control measures would not be in
effect. Using insect screen or mosquito netting to cover
the ventilation openings of a shelter is the best way to
keep out mosquitoes. flies. and all larger insects. The
lack of insect screening-when it would be too
lateto obtain any-could resultin more harrass-
. rnent, discomfort and possible disease than
most people accustomed to modern living are
likely to imagine. However. if the shelter has no air
pump. it is impractical to use screens that obstruct the
free movement ofvital air- except in cold weather.
The fly population would explode after a nuclear
attack. Radiation doses several times larger than doses
that would kill people do not sterilize insects. In
extensive rural areas where almost all people could
have adequate shelter to be safe from fallout. most
domestic animals and wild creatures would be killed.
Trillions of flies would breed in the dead bodies.
If you have prudently kept a can of modern
fly bait in your survival supplies. a little
sprinkled on top of the plastic covering can kill
literally thousands of flies.
Shelter occupants should make every effort to
prevent flies from reaching disease-spreading human
wastes.
Ants. especially in the warmer parts ofthe country.
could drive people out of expedient shelters. The best
prevention isto try to find a shelter-building site that is
not near an ant nest. If shelter occupants are careful in
storing food and eating. ants arc less likely to becomea
problem.
Ticks and chiggers arc usually found on grass
and low bushes. To avoid carrying these pests into the
shelter. do not bring grass or dead leaves into your
shelter for bedding except in freezing weather. Cut
leafy branches high above the ground: few pests live
in tall vegetation.
PERSONAL POSSESSIONS
Toothbrushes are not boiled or otherwise dis-
infected after being used. because we all develop con-
siderable resistance to our own infective organisms.
For the same reason. each individual should have his
own personal drinking cup. bowl. and spoon. They
should be cleaned as well as possible and kept covered
when not in use.
PREVENTION OF SKIN DISEASES
In crowded shelters. especially during hot
weather. skin diseases are likely to be a more serious
problem than is generally recognized. The impor-
tance of learning how to prevent skin diseases was
made apparent by one of the very few shelter-
occupancy tests to be conducted in the summer
without. air conditioning. This was a Navy test in
which 99 men lived for 12 days in an underground
shelter cooled only with outdoor summer air. I.' The
incidence of skin complaints was high. even though
medical treatment was available on a daily basis. The
total number of reports to sick call was 560: 34 of
these 99 healthy young men contracted heat rash and
23 had other skin complaints such as fungus
infections. However. these. sailors lived in an
inadequately ventilated shelter and did not cleanse
their sweaty skins or use the other methods listed
below for preventing skin troubles.
Even in shelters that are skillfully ventilated with
adequate outdoor air. skin diseases will be a serious
problem- especially in hot weather -unless special
hygiene measures are followed. Humid heat and heat
rash increase susceptibility to skin diseases. Most of
the following measures for preventing skin diseases
have been practiced by jungle natives for thousands
of years.
• Wash off sweat and dead skin. (When it is hot
and humid. dead skin is continuously rubbing and
flaking off and starting to decay.) Many jungle
natives rinse their bodies several times a day. Bathing
several times a day with soap is harmful in humid
heat; the rapid loss of normal skin oils is one of the
causes of skin diseases..Your skin can be kept fairlyclean by rinsing offeach day with just a cup ofwater,
while rubbing gently with a very small cloth. A6-inch
square of bedsheet cloth serves well. So that you can
dispose of the dirty water afterwards, wash yourself
while standing on a piece of plastic with itsedges held
up slightly. (Place sticks or narrow boards under the
edges.) Useabout two-thirds of the precious waterfor
the first rinse, starting from the face down and gently
rubbing neck, armpits, stomach, groin, buttocks, and
feet with a washcloth. Then use the remaining water
to rinse off again, using bare fingers. Ifboiling water
is available, sterilize washcloths every day by boiling
them for a few minutes.
• Sleep as cool and bare as practical, to dry the
maximum skin area.
• If practical. sit and sleep only where other
members of your family do and avoid use of bedding
by more than one family.
• Avoid infection from toilet seats by disinfecting
with a strong chlorine solution and then rinsing, by
covering with paper, or by not sitting down.
• Wash or disinfect clothing as often as practical,
especially underwear and socks. Disinfecting cloth-
ing, not laundering it, is the most important health
objective under difficult shelter conditions. Dipping
clothing into boiling water disinfects it. Unless plenty
of water is available for rinsing, do not disinfect
clothing by putting it in a chlorine bleach solution.
• Wear shoes or sandals when walking about, to
prevent fungus infections of the feet.
RESPIRATORY DISEASES
The spread of respiratory and other diseases
transmitted by coughing and sneezing would be
difficult to control in long-occupied shelters.
Adequate ventilation would help in disease preven-
tion. In small shelters, it would be better if persons
who are sneezing or coughing could stay near the
opening being used for air exhaust. In large shelters
with many occupants, the risk of one or moreofthem
having a disease that iseasily spread obviously willbe
higher than in a small shelter.Chapter 13
Surviving Without Doctors
A TEMPORARY RETURN TO SELF-HELP
Most doctors, hospital facilities, and medical
supplies are located in cities. An all-out attack would
destroy most of these modern blessings. Even if
medical assistance were nearby, only a few of the
survivors confined to shelters inareas of heavy fallout
would be able to get needed medicines or the help ofa
doctor. For periods ranging from days to months,
most unprepared survivors would be forced to live
under medical conditionsalmostas primitiveas those
experienced by the majority of mankind for all but
the past few decades of human history.
BENIGN NEGLECT
Life without modern medical help would be less
painful and hazardous for those survivors who have
some practical knowledge of what should be
done-or not done-under primitive, unsanitary
conditions. Information about first aid and hygienic
precautions can be obtained from widely available
Red Cross and civil defense booklets and courses,
This knowledge, with a stock of basic first aid
supplies, would reduce suffering and prevent ~any
dangerous illnesses. However, first aid instructions
do not include advice about what to do for serious
injuries and sicknesses if no doctors or effective
medicines are available.
Where There Is No Doctor," the excellent self-
help handbook recommended by Volunteers in
Technical Assistance, gives much information that
goes far beyond the scope of first aid. But even this
handbook repeatedly recommends getting profes-
sional medical help whenever possible for serious
injuries and illnesses.
Fortunately, the human body has remarkable
capabilities for healing itself, especially if the injured
or sick personand hiscompanions practice intelligent
"benign neglect." Such purposeful non-interference
with the body's recuperative processes was called
"masterful inactivity" by Colonel C. Blanchard
Henry, M.D., a widely recognized authority on mass
casualty evacuation and treatment. Colonel Henry
was one of the first medical officers to visit Hiroshima
and Nagasaki after their destruction and was an
experienced analyzer of civil defense preparations in
several countries.
The following is a brief summary of
Colonel Henry's medical advice for nuclear war
survivors living under primitive conditions and
unable to get- the help of a doctor or effective
medicines.33 (Additionaladvice, enclosed inbrackets,
is from a medical publication.")
• Wounds: Apply only pressure dressings to stop
bleeding-unless an artery has been cut, as bya blast-
hurled piece of glass. If blood is spurting from a
wound, apply both a pressure dressing a~d a
windlass-type. tourniquet. Loosen the tourrnquet
pressure about every 15 minutes, to allow enough
blood to reach the flesh beyond the tourniquet and
keep it alive. There isa fair chance that clotting und~r
the pressure dressing will stop blood loss before It
becomes fatal.
• Infected wounds: Do not change dressings
frequently. The formation of white pus shows that
white corpuscles are mobilizing to combat the
infection. In World War I, wounded soldiers in
hospitals suffered agonies having their wounds
cleaned and dressed frequently; many died as a result
of such harmful care. In contrast, before antibiotics
became available late in World War II, casts and
dressings on infected wounds sometimes were not
changed for weeks. (The author saw this treatment in
China and India and smelled the stench resultingfrom such "benign neglect" of American soldiers'
wounds neglect that helped save limbs and lives.)
• Pieces ofglass deeply embedded in flesh: Do not
probe with tweezers or a knife inan attempt to extract
them. Most glass will come out when the wounds
discharge pus.
• Burns: Do not apply grease, oil or any other
medicine to the burned area. Cover the area securely
with a clean. dry dressing or folded cloth. Do not
change the dressing frequently. [For most burns, the
bandage need not be removed until the tenth to
fourteenth day. Give plenty of slightly salted water:
about I teaspoon (~.5 grn) of salt per quart (or liter),
preferably chilled. in amounts of I to 3 liters
daily. "]
• Broken bones: Apply simple splints to keep the
bones from moving. Do not worry about deformities;
most can be corrected later by a doctor. Do not
attempt traction setting of broken bones.
• Shock: Keep the victim warm. Place blankets or
other insulation material under him. Do not cover
him with so many blankets that he sweats and suffers
harmful tluid losses. Give him plenty ofslightly salted
water [about a teaspoon of salt in a liter (or quart)
of water].
• Heat prostration: Give adequate fluids. includ-
ing slightly salty water.
• Simple childbirth: Keep hands off. Wait until the
mother has given birth. Do not tie and cut the cord
unless a potent disinfectant is available. Instead, use
the primitive practice of wrapping the cord and the
placenta around the infant until they dry. Avoid the
risk of infecting the mother by removing the rest of
the afterbirth: urge the mother to work to expel it.
• Toothache: Do not attempt to pull an aching
tooth. Decaying teeth will abscess and fall out. This is
a painful but seldom fatal process---one which was
endured by most of our remote ancestors who
reached maturity.
VETERINARIAN ANTIBIOTICS
People who for decades have used antibiotics to
combat their infections have not produced normal
quantities of antibodies. and have subnormal
resistance to many infections. People who have not
been dependent on antibiotics have these antibodies.
In the aftermath of a massive nuclear attack, most
sun iving Americans would be in rural areas; many
would need antibiotics. A large part of their need
could be met by the supplies of veterinarian
antibiotics kept on livestock and chicken farms, at
feed mills, and in small towns. Many animals are
given more antibiotics in their short lives than most
Americans receive in theirs. Hogs, for example, are
given antibiotics and; or other disease-controlling
medicines in their feed each day. In many farming
areas, veterinary antibiotics and other medicines are
in larger supply than are those for people. Realistic
preparations to survive an all-out attack should
include utilizing these supplies.
RADIATION SICKNESS
For the vast majority of Americans who would
receive radiation doses from a massive attack, the help
ofcoacts.antibioticg, blood usnaanom.cu; wou}d
not be of life-or-death importance. Very few of those
receiving acute doses (received within 24 hours) of less
than 100 R would become sick, even briefly. All of
thoseexposed to acute doses between 100Rand 200 R
should recover from radiation effects." However,
underpost-attackconditionsofmultiple stresses
andprivations, somewhoreceive acuteradiation
doses of 100 R to 200 R may die ofinfectious dis-
eases becauseoftheir reduced resistance. Iftotal
doses this size or even several times larger are received
overa period of a few months in small doses ofaround
6 R per day, no incapacitatingsymptoms should result.
The human body usually can repair almost all radiation
damage if the daily doses are not too large.
The majority of those with acute doses oflessthan
about 350 R will recover without medical treatment.
Almost all of those receiving acute doses of over 600 R
would die within a few weeks, even if they were to
receive treatment in a typical hospital during
peacetime. Ifall doctorsand the equipmentand drugs
needed for heroic treatments magically were to survive
an attack - and persons suffering from radiation
sickness could reach them - relatively few additional
lives could besaved.
The most effective way to reduce losses ofhealth
and life from radiation sickness is to prevent
excessive exposure to radiation. Adequate shelter
and essential life-support items are the best means of
saving lives in a nuclear war. The following informa-
tion on radiation sickness is given to help the reader
understand the importance of building a good shelter
and to help him distinguish between symptoms of
common illnesses and first symptoms of radiation
sickness.
The first symptoms of radiation sickness are
nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, and a generalfeeling of illness." These symptoms begin several
hours after exposure to acute doses of 100R to 200 R,
and within 30 minutes or less after receiving a fatal
dose. A source of probable confusion is the fact that
one or more of these symptoms is experienced by
many people when they are first exposed to great
danger, as in an air raid shelterduringa conventional
bombardment.
The occupants of a shelter might worry unneces-
sarily for weeks, mistaking their early emotional
reactions for the initial phase of radiation sickness.
This would be particularly true if they had no
dependable instrument for measuring radiation, or
if none of them knew how to use such an
instrument.
The initial symptoms end within a day or two.
Then follows the latent phase of radiation sickness,
during which the patient experiences few, if any,
symptoms. If the dose received was in the non-fatal
range. the latent' phase may last as long as'
2 weeks.
In the final phase. the victim of serious or fatal
radiation sickness will have reduced resistance to
infections and is likely to suffer diarrhea. loss of hair,
and small hemorrhages of the skin, mouth, and; or
intestinal tract. Diarrhea from common causes may
be confused with the onset of radiation sickness, but
hemorrhages and loss of much hair are clear indica-
tions of having received serious. but not necessarily
fatal. radiation exposure. The final phase usually
lasts for one to two months. Any availableantibiotics
should be reserved for this critical phase of
the iIIness.
Doses of 1000 R to 5000 R result in bloody
diarrhea. fever. and blood circulation abnormalities,
with the initial symptoms beginning within less than
30 minutes after exposure and the final phase
occurring less than a day thereafter. Death results
within 2 to 14 days. The victim of a dose of over
5000 R dies a hard death within 48 hours, due to
radiation damage to the central nervous system.
Recovery from most cases of radiation sickness
will be more likely for patients who receive a well
balanced diet, rest. freedom from stress, and clean
surroundings. But most patients, even without these
advantages, willsurvive-s-as proved by the survival of
thousands of Hiroshima and Nagasaki citizens who
suffered serious radiation sickness. Nursing radiation
victims is not hazardous. Even persons dying from a
dose of 5000 Rare not sources ofdangerous radiation
by wartime standards, and radiation sickness is not
contagious.
LIFETIME RISKS FROM RADIATION
The large radiation doses that many survivors ofa
nuclear attack would receive would result in serious
long-term risks ofdeathfrom cancer,butthelifetime
risks from even large wartime radiation doses
are not as bad as many people believe. Signifi-
cantly, no official U.S. estimates have been
made available to the public regarding excess
cancer deaths to be expected if America is
subjected to a nuclear attack. However, reliable
statistics are available on the numbers of addi-
tional fatal cancers suffered by persons who
received large whole-body radiation doses at
Hiroshimaandinotherdisasters, andwholived
for months to decades before dying. Dr. John N.
Auxier-who for years was a leading health
physicist at Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
was one of the American scientists working in
Japan with Japanese scientists studying the
Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors, and cur-
rently is working on radiation problems with
InternationalTechnology Corporation-in 1986
summarized for me the risk of excess fatal
cancersfrom largewhole-body radiation doses:
"If1,000peopleeach receivea whole-bodyradia-
tion dose of 100 rems [or 100 rads, or 100 R],
about 10 additional fatal cancers will result."
These 10 fatal cancers will be in addition to
about 150 fatal cancers that normally will de-
velop among these 1,000 people during their
lifetimes. This risk is proportional to large
doses; thus, if1,000peopleeach receive a doseof
200 rems, about 20 additional lethal cancer
cases would be expected.
"Rem"isan abbreviationfor "roentgenequivalent
(in) man. ''6 The rem takes into account the biological
effects of different kinds of radiation. For external
gamma-ray radiation from fallout, the numericalvalue
of an exposure or dose given in roentgens is approxi-
mately the same as the numericalvalue given in rems or
in rads. The rad is the unit of radiation energy
absorption in any material and applies to all
kinds of nuclear radiations. Therefore, for simpli-
city's sake, this book gives both instrument readings
(exposures) and doses in roentgens (R).
The readerdesiringgood information on the long-
term and worldwide effects of radiation is referred to
two authoritative reports of the National Academy of
Sciences, Washington, D.C. 20006: The Effects on
Populations of Exposures to Low Levels ofIonizing
Radiation (The BEIR Report made by the NAS
Committee on the Biological Effects of IonizingRadiation) (November 1972); and Long-Term World-
wlae EJJectsoj "Mu)ilp)e)Vuc)ear-WeaponsDeionai'lOns
~\()l5),
From the standpoint of basic survival know-how,
these and othercomplicated scientificstudiesshowthat
to minimizelifetime risksfrom radiation, aftera
nuclear attack people should:
• Provide the best protection against radiation for
pregnant womenand youngchildren, since fetuses and
the very young are the most likely to be hurt by
radiation,
• Realize that, with the exception of lung
cancer, older people are no more susceptible to
radiation injury than are those in the prime of
life, Also, a 65-year-old probably will not live
long enough to die of a cancer that takes 20
years or more to develop, Many older people, if
they know realistic risk estimates, will choose
to do essential outdoor work and take non-
incapacitatingradiationdoses in orderto spare
younger members of their families the risk of
getting cancer decades later.
PREVENTION OF THYROID DAMAGE
FROM RADIOACTIVE IODINES
There is no medicine that will effectively prevent
nuclear radiations from damaging the human body
cells that they strike. However, a salt of the dements
potassium and iodine. taken orally even in very small
quantities I : hour to I day before radioactive iodines
are swallowed or inhaled. prevents about 99% of the
damage to the thyroid gland that otherwise would
result. The thyroid gland readily absorbs both non-
radioactive and radioactive iodine. and normally it
retains much of this element in either or both forms.
When ordinary. non-radioactive iodine is made
available in the blood for absorption by the thyroid
gland before any radioactive iodine ismade available.
the gland will absorb and retain so much that it
becomes saturated with non-radioactive iodine.
When saturated. the thyroid can absorb only about
l(i as much additional iodine. including radioactive
forms that later may become available in the blood:
then it is said to be blocked. (Excess iodine in the
blood is rapidly eliminated by the action of
the kidneys.)
An excess of ordinary iodine retained in the
thyroid gland is harmless. but quite small amounts of
radioactive iodine retained in the thyroid eventually
will give such a large rad iation dose to thyroid cells
that abnormalities are likely to result. These would
include loss of thyroid function. nodules in the
thyroid, or thyroid cancer. Sixty-four Marshall
)s)anders on /{onge)ap >"to)) were acclden'ta))y
exposed to radioactive Ia\)out produced by a large
H-bomb test explosion on Bikini Atoll. about
100 miles away. Twenty-two of them developed
thyroid abnormalities beginning nine years later." In
the two days before they were taken out ofthe fallout
area. these completely uninformed natives. living
essentially outdoors. had received estimated whole-
body gamma-ray doses of about 175 R from the
fallout all around them. They absorbed most of the
radioactive iodine retained by their thyroid glands as
a result of eating and drinking fallout-contaminated
food and water during their two days of exposure.
(Because of unusual environmental conditions at the
time of fallout deposition. some of the retained
radioactive iodine may have come from the air
they breathed.)
Anextremely small and inexpensive daily dose
of the preferred non-radioactive potassium salt.
potassium iodide (KI). iftaken I : hour to Iday before
exposure to radioactive iodine. will reduce later
absorption of .radioactive iodine by the thyroid to
only about I% of what the absorption would be
without this preventive measure. Extensive experi-
mentation and study have led to the Federal Drug
Administration's approval of l30-milligram (130-
mg) tablets for this preventive (prophylactic) use
only.":" A 130-mg dose provides the same daily
amount of iodine as does each tablet that English
authorities for years have placed in the hands of the
police near nuclear power plants. for distribution to
the surr oUlll1ing popUlation in the very unlikt:ly event
of a major nuclear accident. It is quite likely that a
similar-sized dose is in the Russian "individual.
standard first-aid packet." According to a compre-
hensive Soviet 1969 civil defense handbook," this
first-aid packet contains "anti-radiation tablets
and anti-vomiting tablets (potassium iodide and
etaperain)...
• Prophylactic use of potassium iodide
in peacetime nuclear accidents.
When the Three Mile Island nuclear reactor
accidentwasworseninganditappearedthatthe
reactor's containment structure might rupture
and release dangerous amounts of radioactive
iodines and other radioactive material into the
atmosphere, the Government rushed prepara-
tion of small bottles of a saturated solution of
potassium iodide. The reactor's containment
structure did not rupture. The 237,013 bottles of
saturated KI solution that were delivered to
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania-mostly too late tohave been effective if the Three Mile Island
accident had become an uncontained meltdown
- were storedin secretina warehouse, andwere
never used.
Sincethisfamous 1979accident,thatinjured
no one, the Governorsofthe50 stateshavebeen
given the responsibility.for protecting Ameri-
cans againstradioiodinesbyprovidingprophy-
lactic potassium iodide. By May of 1986, only in
Tennessee have Americans, other than some
specialists,beengivenpotassiumiodidetablets;
aroundonenuclearreactorsome7,500 residents
have been given the officially approved KI
tablets, to assure their having this protection if
a nuclear accident occurs.
In April of 1982 the Bureau of Radiological
Health and Bureau of Drugs, Food and Drug
Administration, Department of Health and
HumanServicesreleased"FINALRECOMMEN-
DATIONS, Potassium Iodide As A Thyroid-
Blocking Agent In A Radiation Emergency:
Recommendations On Use". These lengthy rec-
ommendations are summarized in the FDA's
"mandated patient product insert". (See a com-
plete copy in the following section.) This insert
is packed with every bottle ofnon-prescription
KI tablets sold. However, the lengthy FDA
recommendations contain many facts not men-
tioned in this required insert, including the
following: "Based on the FDA adverse reaction
reports and an estimated 48 x 106 [48 million]
300-mgdoses of potassium iodide administered
each year [in the United States], the NCRP
[National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurements] estimated an adverse reaction
rate of from 1 in a million to 1 in 10 million
doses." (Note that this extremely low adverse
reaction rate is for doses over twice as large as
the 130-mg prophylactic dose.)
FDA PATIENT INFORMATION USE OF
130-MG SCORED TABLETS OF POTASSIUM
IODIDE FOR THYROID BLOCKING
(Potassium Iodide Tablets, U.S.P.)
(Pronounced poe-TASS-e-um EYE-oh-dyed)
(Abbreviated KI)
TAKE POTASSIUM IODIDE ONLYWHEN
PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICIALS TELL YOU. IN
A RADIATION EMERGENCY,RADIOACTIVE
IODINE COULD BE RELEASED INTO THE
AIR. POTASSIUM IODIDE (A FORM OF IO-
DINE) CAN HELP PROTECT YOU.
IF YOU ARE TOLD TO TAKE THIS MEDI-
CINE, TAKE IT ONE TIME EVERY24 HOURS.
DO NOT TAKE ITMORE OFTEN.MORE WILL
NOT HELP YOU AND MAY INCREASE THE
RISK OF SIDE EFFECTS. DO NOT TAKE
rarsDRUGIFYOUKNOWYOUAREALLER-
GICTOIODINE(SEESIDEEFFECTSBELOW).
INDICATIONS
THYROID BLOCKING IN A RADIATION EMERGENCY
ONLY
DIRECTIONS FOR USE
Use only as directed by State or local public health
authorities in the event of a radiation emergency.
DOSE
ADULTS AND CHILDREN ONE YEAR OF AGE OR
OLDER: One (1) tablet once a day. Crush for small
children.
BABIES UNDER ONE YEAR OF AGE: One-half (112)
tablet once a day. Crush first.
DOSAGE: Takefor 10days unless directed otherwise by
State or local public health authorities.
Store at controlled room temperature between 15° and
30°C (59°to 86°F). Keep bottle tightly closed and protect
from light.
WARNING
POTASSIUM IODIDE SHOULD NOT BE USED BY
PEOPLE ALLERGIC TO IODIDE. Keep out of the reach
of children.. In case of overdose or allergic reaction,
contact a physician or public health authority.
DESCRIPTION
Each iOSArM Tablet contains 130 mg. of potassium
iodide.
HOW POTASSIUM IODIDE WORKS
Certain forms of iodine help your thyroid gland work
right. Most people get the iodine they need from foods
like iodized salt or fish. The thyroid can "store" or hold
only a certain amount of iodine.
In a radiation emergency, radioactive iodine may be
released in the air. This material may be breathed or
swallowed. It may enter the thyroid gland and damage it.
The damage would probably not show itself for years.
Children are most likely to have thyroid damage.
If you take potassium iodide, it will fill up your thyroid
gland. This reduces the chance that harmful radioactive
iodine will enter the thyroid gland.
WHO SHOULD NOT TAKE POTASSIUM IODIDE
The only people who should not take potassium iodide
are people who know they are allergic to iodide. You may
take potassium iodide even if you are taking medicines
for a thyroid problem (for example, a thyroid hormone or
antithyroid drug). Pregnant and nursing women and
babies and children may also take this drug.
HOW AND WHEN TO TAKE POTASSIUMIODIDE
Potassium iodide should be taken as soon as possible
after public health officials tell you. You should take one
dose every 24 hours. More will not help you because the
thyroid can "hold" only limited amounts of iodine. Larger
doseswill increasethe risk of side effects. You will proba-
bly be told not to take the drug for more than 10days.SIDE EFFECTS
Usually, side effects of potassium iodide happen when
people take higher doses for a long time. Youshould be
careful not to take more than the recommended dose or
take it for longer than you are told. Side effects are
unlikely because of the low dose and the short time you
will be taking the drug.
Possible side effects include skin rashes, swelling of the
salivary glands, and "iodism" (metallic taste, burning
mouth and throat, sore teeth and gums, symptoms of a
head cold. and sometimes stomach upset and diarrhea).
A few people have an allergic reaction with more serious
symptoms. These could be fever and joint pain~, or
swelling of parts of the face and body and at times
severe shortness of breath requiring immediate medical
attention.
Takingiodide may rarely cause overactivity of the thyroid
gland, underactivity of the thyroid gland, or enlargement
of the thyroid gland (goiter).
WHAT TO DO IF SIDE EFFECTS OCCUR
If the side effects are severe or if you have an allergic
reaction, stop taking potassium iodide. Then, if possible,
call a doctor or public health authority for instructions.
HOW SUPPLIED
Tablets (Potassium Iodide Tablets, U.S.P.): bot-
tles of [number of tablets in a bottle] tablets
( ). Each white, round,
scoredtabletcontains 130 mg. potassiumiodide.
Note that this official FDA required 'insert
given above prudently stresses the name, the
pronunciation, andthechemicalformula (KI)of
these Government-approved 130-mgpotassium
iodide tablets. Perhaps this emphasized infor-
mation will keep some alarmed Americans
(misinformed in a future crisis by the media
that typically stated during the Chernobyl
nuclearaccidentthat"iodinetablets" were being'
giventopeopleendangeredbyradioactiveiodine
from the burning reactor) from getting and
taking iodine tablets, widely sold for water
purification, or tincture of iodine.
Strangely, neither in official information
available to the general public on the prophy-
lacticuse ofKI norinthe above-mentionedFDA
"FinalRecommendations" is any mentionmade
of the much greater need for KI in a nuclear
war-even for Americans during an overseas
nuclear war in which the United States would
not be a belligerent.
Also note that this official insert contains
no instructionsfor givinga crushed KI tabletto
infants and small children. Nor is there any
mention ofthe fact that the KI under the tablet's
coatingis a more painful-tastingdrugthanany
that most people ever have taken. This omitted
informationisgiveninthe nexttolastsectionof
this chapter.'
• Protection against radioactive iodine
in fallout from a nuclear war fought outside
the United States.
Most strategists believe that a nuclear war fought
by nations otherthan the United States isa more likely
catastrophe than a nuclear attack on America. Several
of the Soviet and Chinese nuclear test explosions have
resulted in very light fallout deposition and some
contamination of milk by radioactiveiodine in manyof
the 50 states. However, serious contamination of milk,
fruits, and vegetables could result if war fallout from
many overseas nuclear explosions were carried
toan Americaatpeace. Thesepotentialdangers
and effective countermeasures are included in
Chapter 18, Trans-Pacific Fallout.
If a nuclear war were to be fought in northern
parts of Asia, or in Europe, or in the Middle East, a
very small fraction of the fallout would come to earth
on parts or all ofthe United States.w This fallout would
not result in an overwhelming catastrophe to Ameri-
cans, although the long-term health hazards would be
serious by peacetime standardsand the economiclosses
would be great.w The dangers from radioactive iodine
in milk produced bycows thatate fallout-contaminated
feeds or drank fallout-contaminated water would be
minimized ifAmericansdid not consumedairy products
for several weeks after the arrival of war fallout. Safe
milk and other baby foods would be the only essential
foods that soon would be in very short supply. The
parents of babies and young children who had stored
potassium iodidewould beespeciallythankful they had
made this very inexpensive preparation, that can give
99%-effective protectionto the thyroid. All members of
families with a supply of potassium iodide could safely
eat a normal diet long before those without it could do
so.
The most dangerous type of radioactive iodine
decays rapidly. At the end of each 8-day period it gives
off only half as much radiation as at the start of that
period. So at the end of 80 days it emits only about
1/1000as much radiation per hour as at the beginning
of these 80days. Because of this rapid decay, a 100-day
supply of potassium iodide should be sufficient if a
nuclear war, either overseas or within the United
States, were to last no more than a week or two.The probabilityof most Americans beingsupplied
with prophylactic potassium iodide during a major
nucleardisasterappearslow. Under present regulations
the decision concerning whether to stockpile and
dispense potassium iodidetablets rests solely with each
state's governor."
• Need for thyroid protection after a nuclear
attack on the United States.-
After a nuclear attack, very few of the survivors
would be able to obtain potassium iodide or to get
adviceabout when to start takingit or stop takingit. In
areas of heavy fallout, some survivors without potas-
sium iodide would receiveradiationdoses large enough
to destroy thyroid function before modern medical
treatments would again become-available. Even those
injuries to the thyroid that result in itscomplete failure
to function cause fewdeaths in normaltimes, but under
post-attackconditions thyroid damage would be much
more hazardous.
• Ways to obtain potassium iodide
for prophylactic use.
* By prescription.
With a prescription from a doctor, a U.S.P.
saturated solution of potassiumiodidecan be boughtat
many pharmacies today. (In a crisis, the present local
supplies would be entirely inadequate.) The saturated
solution contains a very small amount of a compound
that prevents it from deteriorating significantly for a
few years. It is best stored in a dark glass bottle with a
solid, non-metallic cap that screws on liquid-tight. A
separate medicine dropper should be kept in the same
place. An authoritative publication-s of the National
Committeeon Radiation Protectionand Measurements
states: "Supplies of potassium iodide can be stored in a
variety of places, including homes, ... "
In 1990 the price ofa 2-ounce bottle ofU.S.P.
saturatedsolutionofpotassium iodide, which is
sold by prescription only, ranges from about
$7.00 to $11.00 in Colorado. A 2-ounce bottle
contains about 500 drops. Four drops provide
the daily dose of 130 mg for adults and for
children older than one year. For babies less
than one year old, the daily dose of asaturated
solutionistwodrops(65 mg).Thusapproximate-
ly 99% effective protection against the subse-
quentuptakeofradioactiveiodine bythe thyroid
can be gotten by taking saturated potassium
iodide solution. If bought by prescription, today
the recommended daily dose costs 6 to 9 cents.
* Without prescription.
In 1990 the leadingcompanyselling130-mg
potassium iodide tablets without prescription
and bymailorderinthe UnitedStatesis ANBEX,
Inc., P.O. Box 861, Cooper Station, New York,
N.Y. 10276.Twobottles,eachcontainingfourteen
130-mg potassium iodide tablets, cost $10.00.
Thus the costper24-hourdose is36 cents. Tothe
best of my knowledge, the company in the U.S.
that in July of 1990 is selling 130-mg KI tablets
without prescription at the lowest price is Pre-
paredness Products, 3855 South 500 West, Bldg.
G, Salt Lake City, Utah 84115. This company
sells 14 tablets, in a brown, screw-cap glass
bottle, for $3.50, postpaid, including shipping
charges. For three or more bottles, the price is
$2.50 per bottle.
AfterthedisastrousRussian nuclearpower
reactor accident at Chernobyl in May of 1986,
pharmacies in Swedensoon sold all oftheir 130-
mg potassium iodide tablets and Poland limited
its inadequate supplies of prophylactic iodide
salts to the protection of children. In California,
pharmacists reported abnormallylarge sales of
iodine tablets, and also of tincture of iodine-
apparently due to the buyers' having been mis-
informedbythe media'sreports thatEuropeans
were taking "iodine" for protection.
Individualscanbuychemicalreagentgrade
potassium iodide, that is purer than the phar-
maceutical grade, from some chemical supply
firms. No prescription or other authorization is
necessary. In 1990 the least expensive source of
which I am aware is NASCa, 901 Jamesville
Avenue, Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin 53538. The
pricefor 100 grams (100,000mg) in 1990 is$10.50,
plus $2.00 to $4.00 for shipping costs. Thus the
costin 1990 for a 130-mgdailydose is less than2
cents. NASCa sells 500 grams (500,000 mg-
about one pound) for $35.50, plus $2.00 to $4.00
for shipping-making the cost per standard
daily dose only one cent.
For years of storage, crystalline or granular potas-
sium iodide is better than a saturated solution. Dry
potassium iodide should bestored in a dark bottle with
a gasketed, non-metallic cap that screws on tightly.
Two-fluid-ounce bottles, filled with dry potassium
iodide as described below, are good sizes for a family.
Separate medicine droppers should be kept with stored
bottles.
Thus at low cost you can buy and store
enough potassium iodide for your family and
large numbers of your friends and neighbors-
as I did years ago.
• Practical expedient ways to prepare and
take daily prophylactic doses of a saturated
solution of potassium iodide.
To prepare a saturated solution of potassium
iodide, fill a bottle about -60% full of crystalline or
granular potassium iodide. (A 2-fluid-ounce bottle,
made of dark glass and having a solid, non-metallic,screwcap top, is a good size for a family. About 2
ounces of crystalline or granular potassium iodide is
needed to fill a 2-fluid-ounce bottle about 60% full.)
Next, pour safe, room-temperature water into the
bottle until it is about 90% full. Then close the bottle
tightly and shake it vigorously for at least 2 minutes.
Some of the solid potassium iodide should remain
permanently undissolved at the bottom of the bottle;
this is proof that the solution is saturated.
Experiments with a variety of ordinary household
medicine droppersdetermined that Idrop ofa saturated
solution of potassium iodidecontainsfrom 28to 36 mg
of potassium iodide. The recommended expedient
daily doses of a saturated solution (approximately 130
mg for adults and children older than one year, and 65
mg for babies younger than one year) are as follows:
* For adults and children older than one year, 4
drops of a saturated solution of potassium iodide each
24 hours.
* For babies younger than one year, 2 drops of a
saturated solution of potassium iodide each 24 hours.
Potassium iodide has a painfully bad taste, so
badthata singlecrystalor 1dropofthe saturated
solution in a small child's mouth would make
him cry. (A small child would be screaming in
pain before he could eat enough granular or
crystalline KI to make him sick. Some KI
tablets are coated and tasteless.) Since many
persons willnot takea bad-tastingmedication,especially
ifno short-term health hazardsare likely to resultfrom
not taking it, the following two methods of taking a
saturated solution are recommended:
* Put 4drops of the solution into a glass of milk or
other beverage, stir, and drink quickly. Then drink
some ofthe beverage with nothingadded. Ifonly water
is available, use it in the same manner.
* If bread isavailable, place 4drops of the solution
on a small piece of it; dampen and mold it into a firm
ball the size of a large pea, about Ys inch in diameter.
There is almost no taste if this "pill" is swallowed
quickly with water. (Ifthe pill iscoated with margarine,
there is no taste.)
Asstated before, 4drops of the saturated solution
provide a dose approximately equal to 130 mg of
potassium iodide.
• Preparing potassium iodide tablets
to give to infants and small children.
The official FDA instructions for using KI
tablets state that one half of a l30-mg tablet,
"first crushed", should be given every 24 hours
to "babies under one year of age", and that a
whole tablet should be crushed "for small
children."
Putting even a small fraction of a crushed
or pulverized potassium iodide tablet on one's
tongueis a startlingexperience,with a burning
sensation.A slightlyburntsensationcontinues
for hours. Therefore, a mother is advised to
makethisexperimentwhereherchildrencannot
see her.
To eliminate the painfully bad taste of a
crushed or pulverized KI tablet, first pulverize
it thoroughly. Next stir it for a minute into at
least 2 ounces of milk, orange juice, or cold
drink, to make sure that the KI (a salt) is
completely dissolved. Then the taste is not
objectionable.Ifonlywateris available, stirthe
pulverized tablet into more than 2 ounces of
water.
KI is a corrosive salt, more injurious than
aspirin to tissue with which it is in direct
contact. Some doctors advise taking KI tablets
after meals, except when so doing would delay
takingtheinitialdose duringanemergency. All
recognize that taking a dilute solution of KI is
easieronthe stomachthan takingthe samedose
in tablet form. This may be a consequential
consideration when taking KI for weeks during
a prolonged nuclear war emergency.
• WARNINGS
* Elemental(free) iodineispoisonous,except
in the very small amounts in water disinfected
with iodine tablets or a few drops of tincture of
iodine. Furthermore, elemental iodine supplied
by iodine tablets and released by tincture of
iodine dropped into water is not effective as a
blocking agent to prevent thyroid damage. If
you do not have any potassium iodide, DO NOT
TAKE IODINE TABLETS OR TINCTURE OF
IODINE.
* DO NOT MAKE A FUTILE, HARMFUL
ATTEMPT TO EAT ENOUGH IODIZED SALT
TO RESULTIN THYROID BLOCKING. Iodized
salt contains potassium iodide, but in such a
low concentration that it is impossible to eat
enough iodized salt to be helpful as a blocking
agent.
OTHER WAYS TO PREVENT
THYROID DAMAGE
Besides the prophylactic use of potassium
iodide, the following are ways to prevent or
reducethyroiddamage underpeacetime orwar-
time conditions:
* Do not drink or otherwise use fresh milk
produced by cows that have consumed feed or116
water consequentially contaminated with fall-
outorotherradioactive material resultingfrom
a peacetimeaccidentorfrom nuclearexplosions
in a war.
* As a general rule, do not eat fresh vege-
tables until advised it is safe to do so. If under
wartime conditions no official advice is obtain-
able, avoid eating fresh leafy vegetables that
were growing or exposed at the time of fallout
deposition; thoroughly wash all vegetables and
fruits.
* If a dangerously radioactive air mass is
being blown toward your area and is relatively
small (as from some possible nuclear power
facility accidents), andif thereistime, an ordered
evacuation of your area may make it unneces-
sary even to take potassium iodide.
* For protection against inhaled radioactive
iodine, theFDAFinalRecommendations(which
are mentioned in the preceding section) state
that the following measures "should be con-
sidered":" ... sheltering[merelystayingindoors
cansignificantly reduce inhaleddoses], evacua-
tion, respiratory protection, and/or the use of
stable iodide."
Research has beencarried outin an effortto
develop a thyroid protectionprocedure basedon
the ordinary iodine solutions which are used as
disinfectants. Since iodine solutions such as
tincture of iodine and povidone-iodine are dan-
gerous poisons if taken orally, these experi-
ments have utilized absorptionthrough the skin
after topical application on bare skin.
All reported experimental topical applica-
tions on human skin have given less thyroid
protectionthandoes properoral administration
ofpotassium iodide. Moreover, undesirable side
effects of skin application can be serious. For
these reasons researchers to date have not rec-
ommended a procedure for the use of ordinary
iodine solutions for thyroid protection.
Potassium iodide, when obtained in the
crystalline reagent form and used as recom-
mended above on pages 114 and 115, is safe,
inexpensive, and easy to administer. Prudent
individuals should obtain and keep ready for
use an adequate supplyofpotassiurniodidewell
in advance of a crisis.Chapter 14
Expedient Shelter Furnishings
IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE
FURNISHINGS
Throughout history, people have endured being
crowded together while living and sleeping on hard
surfaces. In times of war and privation, people have
lived in such conditionsfor much longerperiods than
would be necessary for shelter occupancy due to
fallout.-Ie Realistic basement-shelter-occupancy tests
conducted by researchcontractorsfor the U.S. Office
of Civil Defense (now the Federal Emergency
Management Agency) have shown that modern
Americans can live and sleep for two weeks on a
concretefloor. Insome ofthese tests, only 8squarefeet
offloor space wasprovided for each person; only pieces
of corrugated cardboard 3/ 16-inchthick lessened the
hardship of sleeping and sitting on concrete.13
Nevertheless, shelters should be adequately
furnished whenever possible, for these reasons:
• More people can occupy a properly furnished
shelter-s-for weeks, if necessary-s-if adequate addi-
tional ventilation is supplied for the additional
occupants.
• Cleanliness, health, and morale are better ifwell-
designed furnishings are used. More serious compli-
cations than discomfort are likely to result if
occupants have to huddle together on a bare
floor-especially if the floor is damp earth.
• Persons occupying a shelter made relatively
comfortable by its furnishings are more likely to stay
in the shelter long enough to avoid dangerous
exposure to fallout radiation.
CHAIRS, BEN~HES, AND BUNKS
The father of the previously described Utah
family of six knew that the members of his family
would be most uncomfortable and probably would
have sore backs if they spent the required 72hours of
continuous shelter occupancy huddled on the floor.
(Their shelter room was only 31/2 feet wide and 161/2
feet Iong.) So this family took with them from home
four folding chairs and two pieces of plywood (each
21 inches wide by 6 feet long) tied as part of the load
on top of the family car. Four small wooden boxes
served as food containers during the drive to the
shelter-building site. In the shelter, the boxes were
used to support the ends of two narrow plywood
bunks (Fig. 14.1).
The family's system of sleeping and sitting in
shifts worked reasonably well. There were discom-
forts: the adults found the two plywood bunks too
narrow, and the plywood was so hard that all the
family members used their sleeping bags for padding
rather than for needed warmth on chilly nights. The
father and oldest son, whose turn to sleep wasduring
normal waking hours, had trouble sleeping in such a
small shelter while the lively 4-year-old son was
awake.
Note that in the shelter pictured in Fig. 14.1the
earth walls are covered with plastic from trash bags.
Covering earth walls with plastic or bed sheets makes
for a cleanershelter, with lessearth falling inthe faces
of people who sleep on the floor. Bedsheets on the
walls make a shelter brighter, but are flammable and
a potential fire hazard. The plasticfilm prevented theFig. 14.1. Bunks and folding chairs furnished
this Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. (Note the sus-
pended transistor radio. Reception is good in all
types of expedient shelters tested to date.)
earth walls from drying and crumbling as a result of
the hot, dry desert air pumped through the shelter
during the day.
Benches with overhead wooden bunks are
shown in Fig. 14.2. These were installed in a Small-
Pole Shelter 6 feet wide with a ceiling almost 7 feet
high.
A well-designed expedient shelter should be as
small as practical, with all space used very efficiently.
The builders should make the heights and widths of
benches and bunks as specified in the detailed shelter
drawings, such as those for the S"mall-Pole Shelter
given in Appendix A.3.
Serious difficulties can result from failure to use
specific dimensions that may appear unimportant.
For example, in field tests at Fort Bragg, N.C., 48
Fig. 14.2. Benches with overhead bunks in a
skillfully designed Small-Pole Shelter of Russian
design. Three rural families in a wooded area of
Tennessee built this expedient blast shelter in 48
hours, including the time spent felling trees and
making furnishings.
airborne infantrymen, working only with hand tools,
cut pine trees and built two 24-man Small-Pole
Shelters in less than 24 hours." The men did not
think it necessary to use the specific dimensions when
they made the furnishings. As a result, they built the
benches too high and the overhead bunks too far
below the ceilings. This errorforced the men to sitfor
hours in hunched positions. Even these able-bodied
young men would have developed very sore backs
and would have wanted very much to leave their
shelters if they had been forced to sit in a bent-over
position for days.
Figure 14.2 shows a good example of the
importance of using dimensions which have been
thoroughly field-tested when building essential parts
of a shelter. Note the small air-exhaust opening
above the girl lying on the overhead bunk at one endof the shelter. This opening led to a small, chimney-
like, air-exhaust duct made of boards, with its cross-
sectional area as specified in Russian civil defense
handbooksfor naturalventilationofsmall expedient
shelters. With such a small air-exhaust opening-
only 4 square inches (10 square centimeters) per
person-a fully occupied shelter of this size would
soon become dangerously overheated in warm or
hot weather, even though a good low-pressure
expedient shelter-ventilating pump (a KAP
or a DirectionalFan) were to be used. A much
larger air-exhaust opening is needed. See
Appendix A.3.
BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK AND CHAIR
On the last night of the Utah family's shelter
stay it was clear that the six members'would win the
cash bonusoffered them for their 72-houroccupancy
of the shelter starting immediately after they com-
pleted building it. Therefore, the author showed them
that night how to make boat-shaped hammocks out of
bedsheets. (Any strong cloth of the right size can.be
used.) They were shown how to hang these short, yet
stable, hammocks securely from poles of the shelter
roof. With three members sleeping in hammocks, two
on the plywood bunks, and one on the floor, all six
could sleepat the same time. Figure 14.3shows part of
this sleepingarrangement.
Fig. 14.3. Girl resting in a boat-shaped ham-
mock. Her brother slept on the upper bunk of their
31 2-ft-wide trench shelter.
In a shelter this sizewithout bunks, hangingfour
short hammocks at slight angles to the length of the
trench would permit four occupants to sleep
comfortably. An additional two persons could sleep
on the floor. In the Utah family's shelter, the floor
was made comfortable by covering the damp earth
with pieces of polyethylene cut from trash bags, then
placing strips of shag rug over the plastic.
In shelters with ceilings at least 6 feet high, one
hammock can be hung above another. In a Small-
Pole Shelter that is 6 feet wide, a greater number of
people can sleep or sitcomfortablyat the same time if
Bedsheet-Hammocks and Bedsheet-Chairs are used
rather than benches or a combination ofbenchesand
overhead bunks. Figure 14.4 shows how Bedsheet-
Hammocks can be used like double-deck bunks.
Fig. 14.4. Bedsheet-Hammockshungone above
the other across the room of a Russian-type Small-
Pole Shelter made of lumber.
Detailed instructions for making a Bedsheet-
Hammock and a Bedsheet-Chair are given at the end
of this chapter.In an evacuation during a real crisis, carrying
comfortable folding chairs and the materials to make
wooden bunks would not be advisable. If the family
car were loaded instead with an equivalent weight of
additional food andclothing, the members'prospects
of surviving would be improved. But in an actual
crisis evacuation, a family planning to occupy a
shelter with a strong roof should take along a
bedsheet for each member. The other lightweight
items described in the instructions for making a
Bedsheet-Hammock and a Bedsheet-Chair also
should becarried. Byfollowing the instructionsat the
end of this chapter, a comfortable hammock can be
made and quickly converted to a comfortable
suspended chair when not needed for sleeping.
Hammocks hung high off the floor and above
other sleepers must be strong, securely suspended,
and cupped so that it is impossible to fall out
accidentally. This is why the instructions emphasize
using a double thickness of bedsheet and folding the.
cloth so as to make the hammock boat-like, with high
sides.
In a cold shelter, keeping warm in a hammock is
somewhat difficult. Easily compressible materials,
such as those used in a sleeping bag, are squeezed so
thin undera person's body thatthey lose most oftheir
insulating value. Pads of newspapers about an inch
thick, protected by cloth coverings, will reduce heat
losses. The best insulation is a quilt, fastened to the
underside of a hammock by attaching it with rows of
stitches every few inches and at right angles to each
other.
Figure 14.5 shows a Bedsheet-Hammock that
had been quickly converted into a Bedsheet-Chair
and hung neara shelterwall. It occupieslessthan half
the floor space used by the two hammocks shown in
the preceding illustration. If a reclining seat is
desired, the two support-points· on the ceiling to
which the chair-arm cords are attached can be
located farther out from the wall.
Enough padding material should be placed in
the bowl-shaped seat of a Bedsheet-Chair to make it
rather flat. Extra clothing or a folded blanket can be
used. The three cords suspending the chair should be
adjusted for length so that the sitter's feet can rest on
the floor and the edge of the chair seat does notpress
on the undersides of his thighs. (Such pressure cuts
off circulation. During the London Blitz of World
War II, many of the people who sat night after night
in shelters on folding chairs with canvas seats
Fig. 14.5. A Bedsheet-Hammock converted
into a comfortable suspended Bedsheet-Chair.
developed serious leg conditions. Authorities later
prohibited bringing such chairs into shelters.)
CAUTION: To prevent skin infections and
other diseases from spreading, a person's
hammock or chair should not be used byothers.
This precaution is particularly important if the
shelter is hot and its occupants are sweaty.
HOW TO MAKE A BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK
AND CONVERT IT TO A SUSPENDED
BEDSHEET-CHAIR
1. PURPOSE: To enable more people to occupy a
shelter more comfortably.
2. ADVANTAGES:
* The hammock can be made in a few minutes,
once you have the materials and the know-
how.
* The only materials required are a strong
double-bed sheet (or an equally large piece ofany strong fabric), a few feet of rope (or a
piece of strong fabric from which expedient
"rope"can be madequickly), a fewlarge nails,
and some wire.
• It is difficult to fall out of the hammock
because its sides are each made about8 inches
shorter than its lengthwise mid-section, so as
to produce a boat-like shape.
• It provides room for head and shouldersclose
to either end; thus it is practical to hang this
hammock between supports that are as close
together as 6 feet. See Fig. 14.6.
Before beginning .work, someone should read
aloud all of the instructions for making the
hammock. This will help to avoid mistakes.
Fig. 14.6. The author lying in a Bedsheet-
Hammock. (Note that he is pulling the operating
cord of a homemade shelter-ventilating pump, a
KAP.)
MAKING A BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK
A. How to fold and tie the bedsheet:
1. Select a strong double-bed sheet (one
containingpolyester isbest) and use a ruleror
tape measure to avoid guessing at measure-
ments.
2. Fold the bedsheet lengthwise down its center
line, so that pairs of corners are together.
3. With the sheet folded, mark the center of
each of the two folded ends; then hold one
end up.
4. Starting at one corner of one end of the
folded bedsheet, make accordion-like pleats.
Make each pleat about 2 inches wide; make
the left corner of each pleat about 1 inch
lower than the left corner of the preceding
pleat, when the sheet is being held as
illustrated. Use your left hand to hold the
completed pleats in place, while making new
pleats with your right hand.
ORNL-DWG 77-17387
CENTER MARK
UPPER ENDOF
FOLDED BEDSHEET
OlUIl.-OWG 71-17388
ORNL-DWG77-173895. When one-half of the upper end of the sheet
has been folded into pleats almost to the
CENTER MARK, adjust the pleats so that
the CENTER MARK isabout4 inches below
the STARTING CORNER.
6. Continue making 2-inch pleats on past the
CENTER MARK, but make the right corner
of each pleat about 1 inch higher than the
right corner of the preceding pleat. When the
pleat-folding is completed, the STARTING
CORNER and the other corner should be at
the same height (4 inches) above the
CENTER MARK.
7. Tie ·the hammock-supporting rope tightly
around the end of the .sheet about 3 inches
below the edge with the CENTER MARK.
(If a rope strong enough to support at least
the weight of two men is not available, make
an expedient "rope" by tearing a 16-inch-
wide strip from a sheet or other strong cloth
and then rolling this strip crosswise to its
length to make a tight roll several feet long.
Then tie string or small strips of clothabout I
inch wide around it, spaced 4 to 6 inches
apart, to keep the rolled-up cloth from
unrolling.)
8. Bend the pleat-folded end of the sheet
downward around the hammock rope, so
that the knot of the hammock rope is
uppermost.
9. To keep the sheet from being pulled through
the encircling hammock rope, bind the
doubled-over end of the sheet with cord (or
with narrow strips of cloth) about 1 inch
below the rope. Tie the binding cord at least
four times around, knotting it each time
around.
10. Repeat the procedure (4 through 9) with the
other end of the double-folded sheet, thus
producing a boat-shaped hammock with its
two sides each about 8 inches shorter than its
lengthwise center section.
OItHl-l1l"G77-l73'iO
TIE ROPE TIGHTLY
AROUND FOLDED
SHEET HERE, 3
INCHES BELOW THE
EDGE WITH THE
CENTER MARK
ORlll-OWe 77-17391How to hang the hammock:
1. To suspend a hammock from a strong
wooden roof such as the poles of a Pole-
Covered Trench Shelter, drive two strong
nails (at least 31/2 inches long) into the wood
at approximately 45° angles, crossing and
touching each other. Bind the two nails
together with wire. To prevent a hammock
rope from being rubbed directlyagainst fixed
metal, make a loose loop of strong wire (best
if doubled) through the crossed nails; tie the
hammock rope to this free-moving wire loop.
2. To suspend the hammock from a wooden
wall, use the same type of crossed-nails
supports, with the nails driven .in one above
the other.
3. For comfort and safety, hang the hammock
with the head end 18 inches higher than the
center and with the foot end 24 inches higher
than the center.
4. To make sure that the hammock is strong
enough, two persons should place their open
hands on its centerline and put all of their
weight on the hammock.
5. To suspend hammocks and hammock-chairs
from a pole roof that is not being built under
fear of immediate attack, use loops of strong
wire around the poles at the planned support
points. (The correct placement of wire loops
takes considerable time and delays comple-
tion of the shelter.) To reduce stresses and
possible breakage, the loops should be loose,
as illustrated.
ORNL-DWG 77-17394
ORNL·DWG 78-6321ATTACHMENT POINT
suspending ropes where each is tied to its
suspension point on the ceiling; also mark the
spot on each suspending rope for a chair arm
where each is tied to its suspension point on a
chair arm. Ifenough light rope or strong cord is
available, the easiest and quickest way to connect
and disconnect the arm supports is to suspend
each arm with a double strand of rope, looped
around an attachment point as illustrated by the
sketch of the attachment point.
'----- ATTACHMENT
POINT ON A
CHAIR "ARM"
ORNL DWG 77 -18432
»<":SUSPENDING
ROPES OF CHAIR
"ARMS"
ORNl-DWG 77-17395
•....----SUSPENSION
, POINT ON
~~CEILING
.".~O'
/ FOLDED EDGE
/
--------..
SUSPENDING ROPE
-,
\
\
\
PEBBLE (ABOUT 1"
DIAMETER) TIED
UNDER CLOTH
/
TIED TIGHTLY WITH
STRING
x
l
~i" /-"1
. <.0.~ , ,,,.
-1111r-:l 'II I .
I I 1...1/I 'l4P-
/
/
(
I
I
SIDEEDGE
A Bedsheet-Hammock may be quickly con-
verted into a comfortableSuspended Bedsheet-Chair
so that a shelter occupant can sit comfortably, yet
occupy less floor space during the daytime. Follow
these steps:
I. Select one end of the hammock to be the top of
the back of the chair.
2. From this end, measure 52 inches (4 ft 4 in.)
along each side-edge of the hammock (see
sketch), and mark these two spots.
3. About i z inches in from these two marks
(toward the centerline of the hammock), make
two more marks.
MAKING A SUSPENDED BEDSHEET-CHAIR
4. To make an attachment point for a chair "arm",
hold a pebble (or a lump of earth) under one of
these last marks, pull the double-thickness cloth
tight around the pebble, and tie it in place. (See
illustration.) Repeat on the otherside-edge of the
hammock.
5. Tie the end of one rope (or "rope" made of 10-
inch-wide strip of strong cloth) to one attach-
ment point, and the end of another rope to the
other attachment point.
6. Suspend the top of the back of the chair to a
suspension point on the ceiling atleast 4 inches
out from the wall, and adjust the length of this
suspending rope so that the chair arms will be
about the same height from the floor as the arms
of an easy chair (see sketch).
7. Suspend the arms of the chair from two
suspension points 20 inches apart and 20 inches
farther out from the wall than the suspension
point of the back of the chair. (Study the
illustration.)
8. Fold the unused end of the hammock up and
back into the "seat"of the chair; fill the hollow of
the seat with coats, a blanket, or anything else
soft, to make it comfortable.
9. Adjust the lengths of all three suspending ropes
so that the chair seat is the right height for the
person sitting in it. When both feet are flat on the
floor, the front edge of the seat should not press
against the undersides of the thighs.
10. To simplify repeated conversion of the hammock
to a chair, mark the spot on each of the 3Chapter 15
Improvised Clothing and Protective Items
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF
COLD WEATHER CLOTHING
If Americans would learn to use skillfully the
ordinary clothing, towels, cloth, newspapers, and
paper bags in their homes, they could keep warm
enough to stay healthy-even under much colder
conditions than they believe endurable without
specialized outdoor winter clothing. Efficient cold-
weather clothing can be improvised if the following
ways of conserving body heat are understood and
used:
• Trap"dead"air. Covering enough of your body
with a thick layer of trapped "dead" air is the basic
requirement for keeping warm. Figure 15.1 shows
how efficient body insulation 'works: Both the air
warmed by close contact with the skin and the water
vapor from evaporated perspiration flow outward
into the insulating material. Any material that breaks
up and separates air into spaces no more than 1/8 inch
ORNL-OWG 77-18426
Fig. 15.1. Efficient body insulation.
across has efficient cells of "dead" air. Air that is
within 1/16 inch of any surface-whether that of a
filament of goose down or of a piece of paper-is
slowed down by "sticking" to that surface and
becoming hard to move. Trapped "dead" air moves
outward very slowly, carrying heat away from the
body at a slow rate-thus minimizing heat losses by
convection.
• Use windbreaker materials. An outer wind-
breaker layer of clothing that is essentially air-tight,
such as a brown paperbag worn overa knit wool cap,
prevents the escape of warmed air and results in an
insulating layer of trapped "dead" air. A single layer
of good windbreaker material also prevents cold
outside air from being blown into the insulating
material and displacing warmed air (Fig. 15.1).
The bestwindbreaker materials permit very little
air to pass through them, while at the same time they
allow watervaporto escape. Perspiration that cannot
be felt or seen on cool skin continually evaporates,
.forming warm water vapor close to the skin. This
moisture escapes outward through good insulating
and windbreaker materials; as a result, underlying
body insulation remains dry and efficient. Water
vapor can pass readily through many sheets of
newspaper or unglazed brown paper, although not
enough wind can flow through a single sheet to be
felt.
• Prevent excessive heat iosses by conduction.
Body heat also is lost by conduction-the direct flow
of heat into a colder material. For example, if one
sleeps in an excellent goose-down sleeping bag laid
directly on cold ground, body weight will compress
the down to a small fraction of an inch. This barrier
to heat flow istoo thin and willcause the body to lose
heat rapidly to the cold earth. Likewise, the soles ofordinary shoes are such poorinsulators that standing
or walking on frozen ground sometimes results in
frozen feet.
MINIMIZING HEAT LOSSES
FROM HEAD AND NECK
The head and neck of the girl pictured in Fig.
15.2 are insulated almost as well as if she were
wearing the hood of a skin-side-out Eskimo parka.
She folded a large, fluffy bath towel and placed it
over her head, neck, and the upper part of her body.
A brown paper bag was worn over the towel. The
edges of the face hole cut in the bag were taped to
prevent tearing. A strip of cloth was tied around the
part of the bag over her neck. Such a parka-like
covering not only is the most efficient way to insulate
the head and neck but also prevents air warmed by
the body from escapingupward around the neck. The
girl also iswearinga man's shirt large enough to cover
and hold thick newspaper insulation around her
body and arms.
Fig. 15.2. A bath towel and a paper bag used to
efficiently insulate head, neck, and shoulders.
It is very important to prevent heat losses from
the head and neck, which have many blood vessels
near the skin surface. Heat losses from these vital
parts cannot be sensed nearly as well as heat losses
from other parts of the body. Furthermore, blood
vessels near the surface in the head and neck do not
automatically constrict to reduce heat losses, as they
do in other parts of the body when heat is being lost
faster than it can besupplied by metabolism. So when
a person is in the cold-particularly when inac-
tive-he should keep his hands, feet, and whole body
warmer by insulating his head and neck very well.
(One difficulty in following this advice is that a well-
covered head often will feel unpleasantly warm-
even sweaty-before one's body temperature rises
enough to increase the warming flow of blood to
hands and feet.)
INSULATING THE WHOLE BODY
Occupants of freezing-cold shelters can keep
warm enough to sleep without blankets by skillfully
using ordinary indoor clothing plus paper and pieces
of cloth to insulate their whole bodies. The girls
pictured in Fig. 15.3 slept without a blanket in a
frozen Door-Covered Trench Shelter while the night
temperature outdoors dropped to 10°F. The shelter's
ventilation openings were adjusted so that the inside
temperature remained a few degrees below freezing,
to prevent frozen earth from melting into icy mud.
These girls had insulated themselves well. First, they
covered their cotton shirts and pants with IO
thicknesses of newspaper wrapped around their
bodies and tied withstrips of cloth.Thenaroundeach
arm and leg they wrapped and tied 8 sheets of
newspaper, thus insulating theirlimbs with at least 16
Fig. 15.3. Girls wearing expedient clothing are
prepared for sleeping in the freezing-cold trench
shelter.thicknesses. As an outercoveringovertheir legs,they
wrapped wide strips torn from a bedsheet. Their
expedient foot coverings were ofthe type described in
a following paragraph. Their heads and necks were
insulated with towels covered with brown paperbags.
Old cotton raincoats allowed water vapor to pass
through and helped hold in place the insulating
newspapers, which extended to cover the girls' bare
hands.
The girls slept on newspapers spread about an
inch thick over the gravel floor of the trench. When
sleeping on cold or frozen ground, it is best to place
newspapers or other insulation on top of a layer of
small limb-tips or brush, so that drying air can
circulate under the bedding. A sheet of plastic under
bedding will keep it from being dampened by a wet
floor but will not prevent it from being dampened
after a few days by condensed water vapor from the
sleeper's body.
Newspaper and other paper through which
water vapor can pass are such good windbreaker
materials that they can be used under any loose-
fitting outer garment-even one through which air
can pass quite readily. They also provide good
insulation. Figure 15.4 shows the author coming out
of an icy shelter at sunup. Many thicknesses of
newspaper covered my body and arms and extended
like cuffs from my sleeves. A porous cotton bathrobe
covered the newspapers and helped hold them in
place. Because so little heat was lost through this
clothing, plenty of warm blood continued to flow to
my bare hands, ridding my body of excess heat by
radiation.
IMPROVISED WINTER FOOTWEAR
Cold-weather footwear that is warmer than all
but the best-insulated winterbootscan be improvised
readily. The trick is learning how to tie the several
insulating layers securely in place, so that you could
hike for miles in the snow if necessary.
For use in dry snow, first tie a porous insulating
layer-such as two bath towels or 10 big sheets of
newspaper-over each shoe. If you have no low-
heeled shoes, make a paper sole by folding 3 large
newspaper sheets to make a sole that has 72
thicknesses of paper. Then proceed in the following
manner:
I. Place your foot and the sole on 10 newspaper
sheets, as pictured in Fig. 15.5.
Fig. 15.4. The author emerges after a night's sleep in freezing-cold temperatures inside a Car-Over-Trench
Shelter. Expedient clothing, primarily newspaper insulation, kept him warm without a blanket.Fig. 15.5..Insulating a foot with a folded newspaper sole and 10 sheets of newspaper.
2. Fold all the sheets over the top of your foot while
keeping the sole in the proper place, as indicated in
Fig. 15.5.
3. Use a strip of cloth about 3 inches wide and 5feet
long to tie the papers in front of your ankle with a
single overhand knot (half ofasquare knot). With
the same strip, tie another single overhand knot
over the tendon behind the ankle. Finally, tie a
bow knot in front of the ankle.
4. Cover the insulating layer with a tough fabric,
. such as canvas or burlap sack material; secure
with a second strip of cloth and tie as described
above.
If the snow is wet, place a piece of strong plastic
film or coated fabric outside the insulating layer,
after securing it with the first strip ofcloth. The outer
protective covering should be tied over the water-
proofing, with the second strip ofclothsecuringboth
it and the waterproofing. (When resting or sleeping in
a dry place, remove any moistureproof layer in the
foot coverings, to let your feet dry.) Figure 15.6
shows a test subject's waterproofed expedient foot-
covering, held in place as described above, after
a 2-mile hike in wet snow. His feet were warm,
and he had not stopped to tighten or adjust the
cloth strips.
Fig. 15.6. Expedient water-proofed foot-
covering, over a newspapersole and othernewspaper
insulation.
Persons who have not worked outdoors in icy
weather seldom realize the importance of warm
footwear for winter. Russian civil defense manuals
direct urban citizens to take winter boots with them
when they evacuate, even in summer.KEEPING WARM WITHOUT FIRE
• If occupants of a cold room or shelter lack
adequate clothing and bedding, all should lie close
together.
• Always place some insulating material between
your body and a cold floor. (Pieces of shag rug are
excellent.) Plastic film should be placed under the
insulating material if the ground is damp.
• Go to bed or put on all your body insulation
before you begin to feel cold. Once the loss of body
heat causes blood vessels in your hands and feet to
constrict, it often is hard to get these vesselsto return
to normal dilation again.
• Do not jump up and down or wave yourarms to
get or to keep warm. The windchill factor is a
measure of air movement over your skin; rapid body
movements always cause some such air movement. If
practical, lie down and cover up; then do muscular
tension exercises by repeatedly tightening all your
muscles so tight that you tremble.
• Prevent sweating and the dampening of insula-
tion by taking off or opening up clothingas you begin
to exercise, before you begin to sweat.
• If you are getting cold, don't smoke. Nicotine
causes blood vessels to constrict and the flow of
blood to hands and feet to be reduced.
• Don't drink an alcoholic beverage to warm
yourself. Alcohol causes increased blood flow close
to the skin surface, resulting in rapid loss of body
heat. It isimpossible for alcohol to make up for such
loss for very long.
RAINWEAR
All that is needed to make serviceable, impro-
vised rainwear iswaterproofmaterial and waterproof
tape. Plastic film from large trash bags will do; 4-mil
polyethylene is better; tough, lightweight, coated
fabric is best. Fabric duct tape is the best widely
available tape.
Figure 15.7 shows a pair of improvised rain
chaps. Rain chaps are separate leg coverings, each
with a loop to suspend it from one's belt and usually
made large enough to be pulled on and off over the
shoes and trousers. Rain chaps are better than
waterproof trousers for working or walking while
wearing a poncho or raincoat, because body
movements cause drying air to be literally pumped
under the chaps. This air keeps trousers and legsdry,
and therefore warmer.
Fig. 15.7. Improvised rainchaps made oftrash-
bag polyethylene and freezer tape.
Inthe same way, a poncho or rain cape willallow
plenty of air to reach the garments under them while
one is working. When exercise is stopped, clothing
underneath will stay dry and warm for some time.
SANDALS
Shoes are almost always in short supply for
years following a disastrous war. Except in very cold
weather, sandals can be made to serve quitewell.The
best sandal designs for hard work and serious
walking have a strap around the heel and in front of
the ankle, with no thong between the toes (Fig. 15.8).
Fig. 15.8. A Ho Chi Minh Sandal, excellent
Vietnamese expedient footwear. Rubber bands cut
from an inner tube have been inserted into a sole of
auto-tire tread.X' _r----------.,.------,,....---_..X
NOTE: DIMENSIONS ARE IN INCHES
Fig. 15.9. A Russian-type homemade fallout
mask. For most Americans this will continue to be a
low-priorityitem as long as Russian warheadsare large.
YT
2
t
(CLOTH
COVERING
HEAD AND
NECK IS
NOT
SHOWN)
x
ELASTIC
POINTS Y AND
-r,DIRECTLY
ABOVE ADAM'S
APPLE
DOUBLE STITCH LINE
0:0 11/4
1 3/4~~'h~3/4o I 1/2
!::,
til
a:1
~IwY'
Making a homemade dustandfallout mask
is still not a high priority survival project. In
normal times, it is better to buy and store good
masks and goggles. The following instruc-
tions for making a homemade mask are an
improved design based on a Russian design
(Fig. 15.9). This mask is the best of several
ORNL-DWG 78-11921
dust and sand that is being blown into a shelter, then
persons in windy areas who occupy small below-ground
expedient shelters should cover their noses and mouths
with several thicknesses of towels or other cloth. Those
who have dust masks should wear them, especially when
working outside in dry, windy weather soon after fallout
deposition. Other than whole-body exposure to
gamma rays, the main danger to well informed
people would be from possible beta burns caused
by fresh, "hot" fallout particles that would collect
in nasal passageways, andfrom swallowedfallout
particles. (Muchofthe materialcontinuallyelimi-
nated from the nose and throat is swallowed.) In
somefallout "hotspots" a secondarydangerwould
be breathing extremely small, "hot" fallout parti-
cles into one'slungs, aftera rain-outoftinyfallout
particles from fallout clouds produced by today's
typical kiloton-range Soviet warheads. In some
areas "hot" particles would be dried and blown
aboutbythe winds within hoursoftheirdeposition
in rain showers.
3 THICKNESSES
OF TERRYCLOTH
TOWELING -J
TOP OF
EYE
SOCKET ..
5 1/2 X 2 1/4 -in.
PIECE OF CLEAR
PLASTIC STITCHED
ON TOP OF BOTH
EYE HOLES
Ifa person has fallout particles on clothingthat he
must continue to wear, he should vigorously brush his
outerclothing beforeenteringa shelterroom. Iffallout
particles are washed off, rinsed off, or otherwise
removed from the skin within a few minutes, no beta
burns will result.
A few days after a nuclear explosion, fallout
particles are not radioactive enough· to cause beta
burns. In areas of heavy fallout, the danger from
external doses ofgamma radiation from fallout on the
ground will continue much longer than will the risk of
beta burns from some of these same fallout particles.
The gamma rays given off by fallout particles
brought into a shelter on clothing or bodies would
subject shelteroccupants to gammadosesso small as to
be ofno significance by wartime standards. Nor would
shelter occupants be endangered by radiation from the
body of a person who, before reaching shelter, had
received a gamma dose large enough to kill him many
times over. Except in science fiction stories, the body of
such a person does not become "radioactive."
FALLOUT MASKS
For the majority of Americans in most fallout
areas, means for filtering fallout particles out of
theairthey breathewould notbe essential survival
equipment.IS Most fallout particles tiny enough to
enterone's lungs would fall to earth so slowlythat
they would reach ground thousandsof miles away
from the explosions. By then, radioactive decay
would make them much less dangerous, and their
depositionwouldbespreadoutovermuchoftheearth.
In pastyearsAmerican-endangeringSovietwar-
heads typically were between20 andone megaton.
Explosions this large would inject almost all fall-
outparticles intothestratosphere, high above rain
clouds. Todaythousandsof deployed SovietICBM
warheads are between 550 and 100 kilotons. (See
Jane's Weapon Systems, 1987-88.)Both surface bursts
and air bursts of today's smaller warheads would
inject most of their radioactive particles into the
troposphere,from whence rain-outsandsnow-outs
would bring huge numbers of even tiny particles
to earth in "hot spots" scattered across America.
Persons living in dry, windy areas often wear dust
masks and goggles to protect their noses and eyes from
dust and sand particles. Iffallout particles are mixed with
CLOTHING TO PROTECT AGAINST
BETA BURNS
Such sandals also have the advantage of enabling one
to wear socks and other foot insulation inside the
straps.
If fresh and very radioactive fallout particles
remain for long on the skin or extremely close to the
skin, beta burns result. Any clothing that keeps fallout
off the skin helps greatly. The best expedient protection
is given by an outer layer ofeasily-removable clothing
similarto the improvised rainwearpreviouslydescribed,
but fully covering the hair and neck and providing
plastic trousers instead of chaps. Removable shoe
coverings are highly advisable. All such protective
coverings should be removed before entering a shelter,
or removed in the entryway before going into the
shelter room.homemade types, and the following instructions for
making and using it have been field-tested.
AN INDIVIDUALLY-FITIED
FALLOUT MASK
Materials Needed:
1. Three rectangular pieces of fluffy toweling (terry
cloth preferred), each piece approximately 12X IS
inches (or use 10 men's handkerchiefs).
2. Elastic. (The best expedient elastic is from the
waistband of a man's undershorts.)
3. Clear plastic (froma photo album, billfold, plastic
storm window, etc.).
4. Sewing materials.
Measurements:
I. Tie a string vertically around your head and face,
passing it 1/2inch in front ofeach of your ears and
making it quite tight.
2. Tie a second string horizontally around your
head, crossing your forehead 11/4 inches above the
top of your eye sockets. These two strings should
cross each other at points X and x', over your
temples.
3. Measure the distance X-to-XI across. your
forehead and the distance X-to-XI going under
yourchin(around your lowerjawand next to your
throat), as indicated by Fig. 15.9.
Construction:
I. Cut out 3 pieces of terrycloth, making the width of
each piece equal to X-to-XI (the curved distance
across yourforehead), and the height ofeach piece
equal to the distance X-to-Y plus 1/2 inch-that is,
equal to half the distance X-to-XI (measured
under your chin) plus 1/2 inch. See Fig. 15.9.
2. Cut the lower edge of each piece as illustrated.
3. Stitch the 3 pieces of terry cloth together, one on
top of the other, thus makingthe mask three layers
thick. Stitch around all four edges of the cloth
rectangle and down the centerline.
4. Mark and cut out the eye holes, as illustrated.
Make the mask's dimensions smaller for children.
5. Cut one rectangle of clear plastic measuring
51/2 X 21/4 inches, and sew this plastic over the
outside of the eye holes, stitching the plastic
around its edges and down the centerline.
6. Fold the three pieces along their vertical center-
line and stitch the lower side together, along the
upper stitch line Y_to_yI . Stitch 1/2 inch from the
lower edge. Then sew a second row of stitches.
7. Sew on the elastic head bands, making them short
enough to hold the mask tightly around yourface.
If the ela~tic is from the waistband of a man's
undershorts, use a doubled elastic both over the
top of your head and around the back of your
head, Make these elastic pieces so short that you
can just put all your fingers comfortably between
the elastic and your head when the pieces are fully
stretched. If using a weaker elastic, be sure to
adjust the lengths to a tight fit, to preventairleaks
under the edges of the mask. Because of the
thickness of material where the elastics are
connected to the uppercorners of the mask, it may
be necessary to do this stitching by hand.
8. To keep fallout particles off your head and neck,
sew a loose-fitting piece of bedsheet cloth (not
illustrated) to the edges ofthe mask that fit around
your face. This cloth should extend back over
your head and down over your collar, over which
it can be tied.
Use:
Put on the mask by first placing it over your
chin, then pulling the back elastic down to fit around
the back of your head.
CAUTION:
To avoid spreading infections, each mask should
be labeled and worn by only one person.Chapter 16
Minimum Pre-Crisis Preparations
Your chances of surviving a nuclear attack will
be improved if you make the following low-cost
preparations beforea serious crisis arises. Once many
Americans become convinced that a nuclearattack is
a near certainty, they will rush to stores and buy all
available survival supplies. If you wait to prepare
until a crisis does arise, you are likely to beamong the
majority who will have to make-do with inadequate
supplies of water containers, food, and materials.
Furthermore, even if you have the necessary
materials and instructions to make the most needed
survival items, you and your family are not likely to
have time to make all of them during a few days of
tense crisis.
The following recommendations .are intended
primarily for the majority who live in areas likely to
be subjected to blast, fire, or extremely heavy fallout.
These people should plan to evacuate to a safer area.
(Many citizens living outside high-risk areas,
.especially homeowners with yards, can and should
make better pre-crisis preparations. These would
include building high-protection-factor permanent
shelters covered with earth.)
SHELTER
Keep on hand the tools and materials your
family or group will need to build or improve a high-
protection-factor expedient shelter: One or more
shovels, a pick (if in a hard-soilarea), a bow-sawwith
an extra blade, a hammer, and 4-mil polyethylene
film for rainproofingyour planned shelter. Also store
the necessary nails, wire, etc. needed for the kind of
shelter you plan to build.
Keep instructions for shelter-building and other
survival essentials in a safe and convenient place.
VENTILATION-COOLING
Make a homemade shelter-ventilating pump, a
KAP, of the size required for the shelter you plan to
build or use.
WATER
Keep on hand water containers (including at
least four 30-gallon untreated polyethylene trash
bags and two sacks or pillowcases for each person), a
pliable garden hose or othertubefor siphoning, and a
plastic bottle ofsodium hypochlorite bleach (such as
Clorox) for disinfecting water and utensils.
FALLOUT METER
Make one or two KFMs and learn how to use
this simple instrument.
FOOD
Store at least a 2-week supply of compact, non-
perishable food. The balanced ration of basic dry
foods described in Chapter 9, Food, satisfies
requirements for adults and larger children at
minimum cost. If your family includes babies or
small children, be sure to store more milk powder,
vegetable oil, and sugar.
Continuing to breast-feed babies bornduringan
impending crisis would greatly simplify their care
should the crisis develop and worsen.
For preparing and cooking basic foods:
• Make a 3-Pipe Grain Mill like the one described
in Chapter 9, Food, or buy a small hand-cranked
grain mill, which grinds more efficiently than other
expedient devices.• Make a Bucket-Stove as described in Chapter9.
During evacuation, the stove can be used as a
container. Store some kitchen-type wooden matches
in a waterproof container.
• Keep essential containers and utensils on hand
for storing and transporting food and for cooking
and serving in a shelter.
SANITATION
A hose-vented 5-gallon can, with heavy plastic
bags for liners, for use as a toilet. Include some
smaller plastic bags and toilet paper with these
supplies. Tampons.
Insectscreenormosquitonetting,andfly
bait. See Chapter 12. .
MEDICINES
• Any special medications needed by family
members.
• Potassiumiodide,a 2-oz bottle,and a medicine-
dropper, for prophylactic protection of the thyroid
gland against radioactive iodines. (Described in the
last section of Chapter 13, Survival Without
Doctors.)
• A first-aid kit and a tube of antibiotic ointment.
LIGHT
• Long-burning candles (with small wicks) suffi-
cient for at least 14 nights.
• An expedient lamp, with extra cotton-string,
wicks, and cooking oil as described in Chapter 11.
• A flashlight and extra batteries.
RADIO
A transistor radio with extra batteries and a
metal box in which to protect it.
OTHER ESSENTIALS
Review the EVACUATION CHECKLIST (de-
veloped primarily for persons who make no prepa-
rations before a crisis) and add items that are special
requirements of your family.Chapter 17
Permanent Family Fallout Shelters for Dual Use
THE NEED
Having a permanent, ready-to-use, well
supplied fallout shelter would greatly improve
millions of American families' chances of sur-
vivinga nuclearattack.Dualusefamily shelters
- shelters that also are useful in peacetime -
are the ones that Americans are most likely to
build in normal peacetime and to maintain for
years in good conditionfor usein a nuclearwar.
The longer nuclear peace lasts, the more
difficult it will be, even during a recognized
crisis, to believe that the unthinkable war is
about to strike us and that we should build
expedient shelters and immediately take other
protective actions. The lifesaving potential of
permanent, ready-to-use family shelters will
increase with the years.
Americans who decide to build permanent
shelters need better instructions than can be
obtained from official sources or from most
contractors. This chapter brings together fall-
out shelter requirements, based on shelters and
shelter components that have been built and
tested in several states and nations. The em-
phasis is on permanent fallout shelters that
many Americans can build for themselves. The
author believes that millions of Americans can
build good permanent fallout shelters or have
local contractors build them - if they learn the
shelter requirements outlined in the following
sections of this chapter and the facts about
nuclearweaponeffectsandprotectivemeasures
given in preceding chapters. Builders can use
their skills and available local resources to
construct permanent, dependable fallout shel-
ters at affordable cost.
Requirements for a permanent, dual-use
family fallout shelter follow.
A HIGH PROTECTION FACTOR,
AT AFFORDABLE COST
A permanent fallout shelter should be built
- and can easily be built - to have a high
enough protection factor to prevent its occu-
pants from receiving fatal or incapacitating
radiation doses, and also from receiving doses
large enough to seriously worsen their risks of
developing cancer in the years following an
attack. Shelters with a protection factor of 40
(PF40) meettheminimumstandardofprotection
for public.sheltersthroughoutthe United States,
andpermanentfamilyfallout sheltersdescribed
in official pamphlets provide at least PF 40
protection. In almost all fallout areas, PF-40
shelters would prevent occupants from receiv-
ingfatal orincapacitatingradiationdoses while'
inside these shelters. However, in areas of
heavy fallout the occupants of PF-40 shelters
could receive radiation doses large enough to
significantlycontributetotheriskofcontracting
cancer years later. Furthermore, the larger the
dose you receive while in a shelter, the smaller
the dose you can receive after you leave shelter
without being incapacitated or killed by your
total dose.
Ifyou builda permanentshelter, you would
be foolish to build a shelter with a PF of only 40
when additional protection is so easy to obtain.
Bymakinga shelterwitha 6-inch-thickconcrete
roofcoveredby30 inchesofshieldingearth, and
withothereasilyattaineddesignfeatures shown
in Figs. 17.1 and 17.2, youcanhave a shelterwith
a protection factor of about 1000. (An occupant
ofa PF 1000shelterwillreceive a radiationdose
only 1/1000th as large as he would receive ifhe
were standing outside in an open field during
the same time interval.) To attain PF 1000
protection near the inner door of the illustrated-.1.---1 ,,9 ~-,,9-.L I
135
/ I
'-
-~
4
...o
...'"o...
o...oz
~
o2
"II
:z:
~
'"C...
Z
<l
..J
11.
"'~0-'OC02
"'~z'"iS~
-' "o~
:Z:z
""",
o~
~\
l111M'.p 9NINI11.I.311 Hl.lI113
"1,,,11
I
f--~-II-++I---- ----,
t- -it=" ~if----It++------r-I---f+-+-I--_-+f.-:;O~_I_----
:z: I I~
I '" :r- I- ~ ~ -1--+1--- Ill-I--
o I I ~_ ~ %. r- ~ ±~r"-
F o ~1.. ~ o :5t:
~ z I ffi al
-I--al·~ I al"-
=~
~ I--=~f----j--+--j--=---T-H--+'_"-"-
=. ~
'"
-
<D
I
so
Q)
b,-..,
...t..
·N
<,
T
l111Mo ElNINI111.311 Hl.lI113
7
/ '-- WATERPROOf MEMBRANE
Fig. 17.1. Permanent Family Fallout Shelter for Dual Use.PIPE
4
[\
-. 7'- 0'11 CEILING
" TO PUMP
q
4
12"
,,'".<1-
'fA
.." 4 -IN. DIA. P£'''FORATED DRAIN PIPE
SECTION A-A'
SECTION 8-8'
Fig. 17.2. Permanent Family Fallout Shelter for Dual Use.
EXIT LID OF
I/S" STEELshelter, its occupants mustplace containers full
of water andfor other good shielding material
against the door. They can do this easily and
quickly if the shelter is supplied with filled
watercontainers such as describedinthe Water
section of this chapter.
The illustrated shelter room has 106 square
feet of floor space - room, enough for 5 adults
and the survival essentials they will need for
longoccupancy, ifshelterfurnishings likethose
described inthischapterare provided. Foreach
additional occupant, increase this shelter's
lengthby2feet. To increase room size, increase
length and not width. This retains maximum
roof strength at minimum cost.
Note in Figs. 17.1 and 17.2 the 12-inch-thick
concrete wall between the landing at the foot of
the stairs and the end ofthe shelterroom. Only a
very small fraction of the radiation coming
through theouterdoors anddown the stairs will
make the 90 degree turn through the inner door,
and mostofthis radiation will not strike shelter
occupants if they place containers filled with
water and other shielding material against the
door.
Also note the homemakeable, low cost
Double-Action PistonPump andfilter, shownin
Fig. 17.1, that even in a heat wave will supply
adequate air through the 5-inch-diameter air-
intake pipe - all described in Appendix E.
Few survival-minded Americans, before a
recognized international crisis arises, either
canafford orbelievethattheycanafford tobuild
a permanent family fallout shelter costing
around $10,000 in 1987. A small reinforced con-
crete, below-groundshelterofthe type specified
in official Federal Emergency Management
Agency pamphlets costs about $100 per square
foot of floor space, if built by a contractor in a
typical suburban area. Those with the needed
skills and time can save about half of this cost
bydoingtheirownwork. Also; atmany building
siteswheregravitydrainageofthe earth around
a shelter'swalls canbe assured and hydrostatic
earthpressure againstthewallsthus prevented,
no steelreinforcement inthe pouredconcrete or
concreteblockwallsisneeded - unless required
by the local building code.
Caution: Steel reinforcement in the walls
andfloor is needed in some clay soils thatswell
when wet and exert sufficient inward and up-
ward pressure to crack unreinforced walls and
floor slabs. Consult local builders who have
learned from experience whetherwall andfloor
reinforcementisneeded in the type ofsoil where
you plan to build. If needed, a grid of 112-inch
rebars, spaced at 12inches, usually is adequate.
To save money on steel reinforcement, check
prices in salvage yards for used rebars and
substitutereinIQrcin5materials suchas junked
cable and small pipes.
How to safely pour a shelter's concrete roof
slab without using a contractor's usual forms
and equipment is indicated by Figs. 17.1 and
17.2. These drawings show 8-ft.-Iong sheets of
3/4-inch plywood supported at their ends on
shelter walls 7 feet-6 inches apart. Preparatory
to pouring the concrete, the plywood sheets
should be supported along the centerline of the
shelter by 4"x4"s and other lumber, which can
be used laterto buildseats andoverhead bunks.
Plywoodleftontheceilingreducescondensation
and heating problems in cold weather, but in-
creases the volume of outdoor air that must be
pumped through the shelter to maintain toler-
able temperatures when it is occupied in hot
weather. This was clearly demonstrated in the
summer of 1963 when the author used SIMOeS
(simulated occupants that produce heat and
watervaporlike people)to determinethe habita-
bility of a six-roomlet below ground group
shelter, with a reinforced concrete roof that had
been built in this manner by six New Jersey
farm families. They had left ordinary 3/4-inch
exterior plywood on the ceiling. Because the
hollowconcretewall-blocks andthe welldrained
gravel under the floor also kept heat from
escapingintothe surroundingsoil, and because
only natural ventilation was provided, the
temperature/humidity became dangerously
high within a few hours.
Insulating a shelter's walls and ceiling can
be disadvantageous, because insulation makes
unavailablethe "heatsink" ofthe shelter andits
surrounding earth. In hot weather insulation
reduces the time during which ventilation can
be stopped or restricted without disastrously
overheating the occupants.
Today, for such a shelter it would be better
to use pressure-treated, rot-proof plywood and
lumber, approved by leading building codes.
Forinformation,writetotheAmericanPlywood
Association,P.O. Box 11700, Tacoma, WA98411,
enquiringaboutrot-proofplywood,dimensional
lumber, and other material used in building the
All-Weather Wood Foundation. Most lumber
yards will obtain treated plywood on order, and
sell itfor about50% more thanordinaryexterior
grade plywood.
Bigsavingsinshelterconstructioncostsare
made by using salvaged and/or used materials.
Manufacturers of pre-cast reinforced concrete
beams and floor sections often sell rejects for
very little. Most salvage yards have steel beamsand other material that make excellent roofing
for earth-covered shelters. (Shortly before the
Cuban Missile Crisis, when living near New
York, I built for myself at modest cost a very
small shelteron a well drained hillside. I made
it almost entirely of steel channels bought and
cut to order at a salvage yard.) Used cylindrical
steel tanks with closed ends often make good
low-cost permanent shelters. One of the best
low-cost family shelters that I ever went into
was on a hillside overlooking San Francisco
Bay. It was made of a salvaged steel brewing
tank that had been installed after a vertical
cylindricalentrancewitha doorhadbeenwelded
on it. The tank's exterior had been protected
with a bituminous coating. Its survival-minded
owner was a brilliant Hungarian refugee who,
as a boy, had survived in a deep wine cellar
throughout the Russian siege and shelling of
Budapest. Nothing equals war experience to
teach the lifesaving value of shelters.
MINIMIZATION OF FIRE AND
CARBON MONOXIDE DANGERS
Many shelterdesigners and builders do not
realizethe probableextentoffires aftera major
nuclear attack. Nor do the big majority ofthem
provide shelters built under or Close to a house
with adequate protection against the entry of
deadlyamountsofcarbonmonoxide if the house
burns. Although the areas of fires.resulting
from a nuclear explosion generally will be
about as extensive as the areas of significant
blast damage," on a clear day a house up to
about 8 miles from ground zero can be ignited
by the thermal pulse of a 1-megaton atrburst,"
Figure 7.2 in Chapter 7 is a photograph of a car
set on fire by a nuclear explosion so far away
that the car was not even dented by the blast.
This photograph indicates how a thermal pulse
can go through window glass and ignite cur-
tains, upholstery, or dry paper, even if flam-
mable material outdoors is too damp to be
ignited. Furthermore, fires from any cause can
spread, especially in fallout areas following a
nuclear attack when firefighters may be unable
or unwilling to expose themselves outdoors to
radiation.
Good protection against carbon monoxide
is provided by a permanent earth-covered shel-
ter, built with its entry outdoors and well sepa-
rated from a house and other flammable struc-
tures, and constructed so that it can be closed
gas-tight.Boththeair-intake andtheair-exhaust
pipes should be installed so that they can be
quickly closed air-tight, as with screw-on fit-
tings. Suchclosuresshouldbekeptwell greased
and securelyattachedcloseto wheretheywould
be used.Ifa shelter'sentryisthrougha passage-
way from a house, a gasketted steel firedoor,
insulatedontheshelterside,shouldbeinstalled
near the house end of the passageway. The
shelter should be further protected by a second
gas-tight door, to prevent the entry of carbon
monoxide and smoke if heat from the burning
house destroys the gasket on the firedoor. If
specialfiredoorgasketsarenotavailable,rubber
weatherstripping will serve. To lessen the risk
of carbon monoxide being pumped into the
shelter if the house burns and air must be
pumped into the shelter while the fire still is
smoldering, the air-intake and pump should be
at the far end ofthe shelter, and the air-exhaust
.pipe and emergency exit should be near the
passageway from the house.
Be sure to seal electrical conduits leading
from a basementto a connectedshelter,sothatif
the house burns carbon monoxide can not flow
throughtheconduits intotheshelterwhenfresh
outdoorairisnotbeingpumpedintothe shelter.
The author, while conducting ventilation and
habitability tests of an earth-covered blast
shelterconnected through a tunnel to a house's
basement,observedairflowingoutthrough un-
sealed conduits, the reverse of such a possible
life-endangeringflowof carbonmonoxide.When
the shelter was being maintained at a slight
overpressurebycrankingitsblowerto pumpin
outdoor air, a little air flowed through the un-
sealed conduit into the basement.
For ways to minimize carbon monoxide
dangersarisingfromcooking,heating,lighting,
and smoking, see following sections in this
chapter.
Rememberthat air contaminated with only
0.16% carbon monoxide can kill you in 2 to 3
hours, and 0.04% carbon monoxide causes
frontal headaches and nausea in 2 to 3 hours.
The Navy sets its safe allowable carbon mon-
oxide concentration in air at 0.01%. (Shelter
HabitabilityStudies- TheEffectofOxygen Depletion
and Fire Gasses on Occupants of Shelters, by J. S.
Muraoka, Report NCEL-TR-144, July 1961.)
PREVENTION OF CRACKS AND
WET SHELTER PROBLEMS
If wet basements are a problem in your
locality, below ground shelters are likely to be
wet and unsatisfactory unless appropriate pre-
ventative measures are taken during their
design and construction. When making plans,
youshouldconsultlocalbuildersofsatisfactory
basements. You also should question persons
who at various times ofthe year have observed
excavations, holes, and/or basements in your
immediate vicinity, or have noted seasonal
swampy places or springs.
Themostdifficulttypeofsheltertokeepdry
for decades is one that is wholly or partially
below the water table for part or all ofthe year.
Concrete is not completely watertight. Water-
proofcoatingsandcoveringsoftenaredamaged
during construction, or deteriorate with age.Shelter walls sometimes crack due to settling
and earth movements. Metal shelters usually
develop small leaks long before they become
dangerously weakened.
A l00-occupant, below ground shelter, built
in 1984 near Dallas, Texas as a prototype blast
shelterfor industrial workers, wasflooded when
the water table rose. The poorly sealed opening
of this shelter's emergency exit was below
ground level, and after heavy rains was below
the water table. A prudently designed shelter
has the top of its emergency exit slightly above
the surface of the surrounding earth, as illus-
trated in Fig. 17.2. All underground electric
conduits leading down into a shelter must be
well sealed to prevent entry of water.
To prevent a wholly or partially below-
water-table shelter from becoming wet inside
sooner or later, it should have a sump and an
automatic sump pump todischarge waterto the
ground outside. If at any time you find that the
sump pump is discharging an appreciable
amount of water, you may have a serious wet-
shelter problem if electric power fails after an
attack.
A manually operated bilge pump and a
sufficiently long discharge hose can be bought
for about $20.00 from marine supply mail order
firms, including West Marine Products, Box
5189, SantaCruz, California95063, and Defender
Industries, Inc., P.O. Box 820, New Rochelle,
NewYork 10802-0820. (Longestablished marine
supply companies also are good sources ofuse-
proven chemical toilets, first aid kits, lights,
rope, etc.)
Shelter roof surfaces should be gently
sloped, no matterhowgood a waterproofcoating
is to be applied. By making a concrete shelter
roofaslittleas 1inch thickeralongitscenterline
than along its sides, so that it slopes to both
sides, the prospects are improvedfor having an
earth-covered coated roof that will not leak for
decades.
Figures 17.1 and 17.2illustrate the following
ways to prevent having a wet shelter:
* Put a layer of gravel or crushed rock in
the bottom of the excavation, and install per-
forated drainage pipes if gravity drainage is
practical.
Ji. Cover the gravel or crushed rock in the
floor area with a plastic vapor barrier before
pouring a concrete floor.
Ji. Coat the outer surfaces of roof and walls
with bituminous waterproofingorothercoating
that has proved to be most effective in your
locality.
139
Ji. Backfill with gravel or crushed rock
againstthe walls, to keep the soilfrom possibly
becomingsaturated.Saturatedsoilexertshydro-
static pressure against walls, and may crack
them and cause them to leak. In some areas it is
more economical to cover a shelter's coated
wallswith a subsurfacedrainage matting(such
as Enkadrain, manufactured and sold by BASF
Corporation, Fibers Division, Enka, North
Carolina 28728). This will eliminate the costs of
backfilling with gravel or crushed rock.
NON-FLOATABLE SHELTERS
In most localities the water table usually is
belowthedepthofexcavationneededto buildor
install a belowground shelter. In some areas,
however, after rainy periods the water table
may rise until it is only a foot or two below the
surface. Then a watertight shelter may float
upward through the surroundingsaturatedsoil,
unless its weight plus the weightofits covering
earth is sufficienttowithstandits buoyancy. (In
many places swimming pools are kept full to
prevent them from being cracked by uneven
buoyant forces if the water table rises.)
Dramaticexamplesoffloating shelterswere
steel blast shelters, guaranteed by contractors
to be watertight, that were installed under the
lawns of some Houston, Texas homes shortly
after the Cuban Missile Crisis. When the water
table rose afterheavy rains, these shelterscame
up to the surface like giant mushrooms, to the
frustrated dismay of their owners and the satis-
faction of anti-defense newspaper feature
writers.
The most expensive permanent family fall-
out shelter described in a Federal Emergency
Management Agency free handout (pamphlet
H-12-1) is floatable. It is designed to be built of
reinforced concretecoveredby a flagstone patio
only about3 inches abovethe ground. Its6-inch-
thick concrete roof is covered by a total thick-
ness ofonly6 inches ofsand andflagstone. Like
the rest of FEMA's permanent shelters, no
prototype of this approximately PF-40 shelter
was built, nor is there any record of anyone
actually having built this shelter. In contrast,
the belowground shelterillustratedbyFigs. 17.1
and 17.2 would not float even if it did not have
assured gravity drainage of the surrounding
soil through the perforated drain pipes in the
gravel on which it rests, because this shelter is
weighted down by the thick earth berm on its
roof.
ADEQUATE,DEPENDABLE
VENTILATION/COOLING
Basic facts that you need to provide ade-
quate, dependable ventilation for a small ormedium sized shelter are given in Chapter 6,
Ventilation and Cooling of Shelters. A good
permanentshelterhastwo ventilation systems:
• The primary ventilation system of a small
permanent shelter should utilize a manually
operated centrifugal blower, or a homemade
Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump. (See Ap-
pendix E.) A satisfactory air pump must be
capable of supplying adequate outdoor air
through an air-intake pipe, a filter, and an air-
exhaustpipe. (See Figs. 17.1and 17.2.)"Adequate
outdoorair"for a smallsheltermeans atleast 15
cubicfeet perminuteperoccupantfor the cooler
partsofthe United States,andatleast30 cfm per
occupant in, most of the country. Most per-
manent shelters have centrifugal blowers that
can notdeliver an adequate volume ofairinhot
weather for each planned occupant.
For a medium sized permanent shelter,
installing two or more manually powered air
pumps is both mor~ dependable and more eco-
nomicalthan providinganemergencygenerator
and its engine to supply power to an electric
blower. The Swiss, who have made the world's
bestand mostexpensive percapitapreparations
to survive a war, use one or more hand-cranked
centrifugal blowers to ventilate most of their
shelters.
• The multi-week and/or emergency ventila-
tion system of a permanent shelter that has an
emergency exit should depend on a homemade
KAP, made before a crisis and kept readyto use.
(See Appendix B, How to Make and Use a
HomemadeShelter-VentilatingPump,theKAP.)
Byopeningboththeentrance andtheemergency
exit, the shelter is provided withtwo large,low-
resistance openings through which a KAP can
pump large volumes of air with minimum
work.
Warning: Keep screen doors and/or screen
panels ready to protect all openings againstthe
swarmsof flies and mosquitoeslikelytobecome
dangerous pests in fallout areas. UseyourKAP
to pump adequate air through screens. Insect
screens greatly reduce natural ventilation, as
the author first noted in Calcutta while a bed-
ridden patient in a stifling hot ward of a hastily
constructed Armyhospital. Becausethere were
no fans or blowers to pump in outdoor air or
circulate the air inside, window screens were
openedinthedaytimewhenmalariamosquitoes
werenotflying. Thedoctors correctlyconcluded
thatthe temperaturereduction when the screens
were opened helped the patients more than they
were endangered by the entering filthy flies.
Adequate ventilation is more important than
protection from flies, butwith a KAP and insect
screens you can have both. Flies, mosquitoes,
and other insects can be killed very effectively
by occasionally spraying or painting screens
and other alighting surfaces with water solu-
tions of insecticides containing permithin and
sold in many farm stores.
ADVICE ON VENTILATION
OPENINGS AND FITTINGS
• Install ventilation pipes large enough to
reduce resistancetoairflow, thusincreasingthe
volumeofairthattheshelter'spumpcandeliver.
A shelter with a 200-cfm pump (such as the
homemakeable Plywood Double-Action Piston
Pump described in Appendix E) should have
5-inch galvanized steel pipe. The pumps that
are installed in most family shelters deliver
only about 100 cfm or less. Four-inch pipe is
adequate for use with pumps this small, pro-
vided that the pipes have no more than two
right-angle turns below each gooseneck. (A 90-
degree L gives about as much resistance to
airflow as 12 feet of straight pipe.)
• Make and installa gooseneckwith itsmouth
abouttwicethediameterofthe pipe, as indicated
in Fig. 17.1. The purpose of such a gooseneck is
to preventmoreofthe largerdescendingfallout
particles from being pumped or blown into the
shelter. For example, if 200 cfm of air is being
pumped into a shelt~r through a gooseneck of
5-inch-diameter pipe with its mouth also 5
inchesindiameter,the velocityofthe air up into
the mouth of the gooseneck is about 1,440 feet
per minute, and sand-like spherical particles
smaller than approximately 500 microns in
diameteralso are "sucked" Up.6Butifthe5-inch
gooseneck's mouth is 10 inches across, then the
upward air velocity is reduced to about 360 feet
per minute, and only particles smaller than
approximately 180microns across are "sucked"
up. Particles in the 180 to 500 micron-diameter
range are relatively large and fall to earth in
about 40 to 70 minutes from 35,000 feet, the base
of the mushroomcloudofa 1-megatonexplosion.
(SeeFig.6.4.)Theseparticlesareverydangerous
because theirradioactivityhashadlittletimeto
decay, and should be kept out of a shelter's
ventilationsystem. Furthermore, largeparticles
retained in a shelter's filter restrict airflow
sooner than do small ones. (If an appropriately
curved piece of5-inch steelpipecannotbefound
in a salvage yard or elsewhere, a good welder
can use 5-inch steel pipe to make a substitute
gooseneck with two 90-degree turns.)
• Do not use air intake hoods on a permanent
shelter's pipes, because hoods are not as effec-
tive as goosenecks in 'preventing fallout par-
ticles from entering ventilation pipes. Also,pumping a given volume of air through a hood
is more work than pumping the same volume
through a gooseneckwithequalcross-sectional
areas.
• Never install any screen inside a gooseneck
or air intake hood, because spider webs and the
debris that sticks to webs will greatly reduce
airflow. The author saw a gooseneck with a
blast valve built inside it; spider webs and
attached trash on this blast valve had conse-
quentially reduced the volume of air that this
shelter's pump coulddeliver. Of course a screen
is much more easily obstructed than a blast
valve.YetFEMA'swidelydistributed pamphlets
on a permanent Horne Fallout Shelter (H-12-1)
and on a Home Blast Shelter (H-12-3) continue
in successive editions to give detailed instruc-
tions for making an air intake hood with a
screen soldered inside it. Butthese sheltersthat
never have been built have much more serious
weaknesses, including the likelihood that the
aboveground parts of the ventilation pipes of
the blast shelter would be bent over or broken
off by blast-wind-hurled parts of buildings and
trees, even in suburbia. (350 mph is the maxi-
mum velocity of the blast wind where the blast
overpressure is 15 psi from a 1-megaton air
burst.s The ventilation openings of the blast-
tested expedient blast shelters described in
Appendix D are much more likely to remain
serviceableafter beingsubjectedto severeblast
effects, because blast-protector logs are placed
around their openings, that are only a few
inches above ground level.)
PREVENTION AND CONTROL
OF CONDENSATION
A shelter can be watertight, yet at certain
seasons of the year its walls, ceiling, and floor
can be dripping wet withwater condensed from
enteringoutdoor air. (This is a seriousproblem,
except in arid parts of the West.) During the
winter months a shelter and its surrounding
earth get cold; then especially on some spring
days the dew point of entering outdoor air is
higher than the temperature of the shelter's
interior surfaces. As a result, condensation
occurs onthose surfaces that are coolerthan the
dew point of the pumped-through air.
The most dramatic example that I have
observed of the seriousness ofthis condensation
problem was the drippingceilingand wetwalls
of a reinforced-concrete, family-sized shelter
that I inspected on an early spring day at the
Civil Defence College in Yorkshire, England.
Suchcondensation also can occur in above-
ground structures. Before World War II I had a
600-year-oldbedroominQueen's College, Oxford
University. My bedroom's outer wall was made
of solid limestone blocks about 15 inches thick,
simply plastered and painted on the inside. On
some spring days moisture condensed on the
inside of the cold outer wall, ran down, and
collected in little puddles on the floor. The
occasional small coal fire in my adjacent study
was barely sufficienttograduallyevaporatethe
water and reduce my bedroom's humidity
enough to prevent mold from forming. This
often-repeated occurrence proves the inade-
quacyofmerelykeepinganelectriclightturned
on for heat to prevent condensation inside an
uninsulated shelter built in a cool, frequently
humid locality.
Condensation and resultant 100 percent
humid air can rust and eat away most steel
pipes. Ventilation pipes should be made of
galvanized steel or other materials that are
undamaged by seasonal condensation and 100
percent humidity. In Connecticut I saw shelter
ventilation pipes made of steel protected with
two coats of marine paint; they were badly
rusted only two years after installation.
Operating it dehumidifier with automatic
controls is the most practical way for most
peopleto preventcondensation andotherdamp-
ness problems in a shelter during peacetime.
Almost all of the Chinese shelters that I in-
spected in six cities are dual-use shelters and
typicallyareequippedwithlargedehumidifiers.
A small dehumidifier adequate for a family
shelter can be bought from a dependable mail
order company, such as Sears, for about $250 in
1987.
To save floor space and facilitate removal
of water, a dehumidifier should be installed
near a shelter's ceiling. Then water from the
dehumidifier can be disposed of most easily
through a pipe or tube providing gravity drain-
age, best to the outdoors, second best to the
sewer. (After a nuclear attack the sewer system
may become clogged and sewage may back up
andflow into a belowground room havingpipes
that normallydischarge intothe sewer, andthat
lackcheckvalves.) Ifthe abovementionedways
of removing water are not possible, a sump and
an automatic sump pump discharging water to
the ground outdoors can solve the peacetime
water disposal problem.
After an attack, electric power can be ex-
pected to fail and shelter humidity will have to
be controlled as much as possiblebyventilation
with outdoor air. A simplewayto learnwhento
ventilate a shelter to dry it was described in a
Russian article on shelter management: Keepseveral small cans of water in the shelter. They
will be at about the same temperature as the
shelter walls when the shelter is closed and is
not being ventilated. If a filled can is exposed to
outdoor air for about 10 minutes and moisture
condenses on it (as a glass filled with an iced
drink "sweats"on a humid summerday), do not
ventilate the shelter. If no moisture condenses
on the can, ventilate.
A WALK-IN ENTRANCE
Only a small fraction of permanent family
shelters without a walk-in entrance have "been
kept in good condition for many years. Per-
manent Iamrly shelters with vertical or crawl-
in entrances are found so inconvenient that the
bigmajority ofowners do notuse them even for
rotatedfood storage. In normal peacetime, most
well informed Americans concerned with pro-
tectingtheirfamiliesconcludethatonlya shelter
skillfullydesigned for dual use justifiesthecost
of building and maintaining it. Significantly,
Chinese civil defense has come to the same
conclusionregardingChinesepermanentpublic
shelters: thosethathave been built, and thatstill
are being built, are almost all useful both in
peacetime and in wartime.
If a family can use its shelter without
having to go outside and be exposed to rain,
snow, cold, or night problems, its dual use
shelter will be a more valuable peacetime asset
than a shelter not directly connected to the
house. Furthermore, a directlyconnectedshelter
can be entered more quickly in a crisis, and
probably will reduce post-attack exposures to
fallout radiation received by persons carrying
things into the shelter, or by those moving
about post-attackto protectthe home. The main
disadvantages of a directly connected shelter
are that it usually provides poorer protection
againstheat, smoke andcarbonmonoxideifthe
house burns and that it is more expensive to
build than an earth-covered shelter with an
outdoor walk-in entrance, such as the one illus-
trated in Figs. 17.1 and 17.2.
AN EMERGENCY EXIT THAT ALSO
PROVIDES A SECOND LARGE
VENTILATION OPENING
Having an emergency exit in a fallout shel-
ter is not as important as having one in a blast
shelter, unless the fallout shelter is under or
connected to a building. (Since buildings are
likely to burn, itis importantto have a means of
escape.) However, an emergency exit makes
any shelter more practical to live in than a
shelterwithonlyonelargeopening- especially
in a heavyfallout areawhereitmaybe necessary
to stay inside most of the time for weeks or
months. Occupants of a shelter with only one
large opening will not have adequate natural
ventilation and will have to keep laboriously
pumpingair- atleastintermittently- through
the air-supply pipes to maintain liveable tem-
perature and/or humidity conditions.
Byopeningboth a shelter'sentrance and its
e-mergency exit,andtakingmeasurestoprevent
the entry of rain, snow, and all but the smallest
fallout particles (see Appendix F), natural ven-
tilationwillbeadequatemostofthe time, except
inhot,cal-mweather.\Nithtwolar'E,eo\)en\:n.'E,s,a
homemade KAP (see Appendix B) can be used
to pump enough outdoorairthrough the shelter,
with much less work than is required to pump
less air with a relatively high-pressure pump
through typical ventilation pipes.
A DEPENDABLE, HIGH-PROTECTION-
FACTOR EMERGENCY EXIT
Occupants of a shelter with a dependable
emergency exit will have less fear of being
trappedifthe mainentryisblocked.Iftheyopen
the exit, they also will be able to ventilate the
shelter with natural ventilation through the
entry and the exit, or with forced ventilation by
operating a KAP.
To provide excellent radiation protection, a
typical high-PF emergency exit is filled with
sand. Suchanexithas a bolted-onsteel plate on
its bottom inside the shelter, and an easily cut,
waterproof, plastic-film covering over its top,
which is a few inches below ground level..
Obvious disadvantages of this typical sand-
filled emergency exit include the difficulty of
safely removing the bottom plate while sand is
pressing down on it, and the impossibility of
cutting the plastic film over the top of the exit
without having fallout-contaminated earth fall
on the person who does the cutting, and into the
shelterroom. Furthermore,iftheearth covering
thetopofanemergencyexitisfrozen, occupants
may be unable to break through it and get out.
An improved design of sand-filled emer-
gency exit was conceived by Dr. Conrad V.
Chester of Oak Ridge National Laboratory and
in 1986 was further improved, built, and tested
in a full-scale model bythe author. As shown in
Fig. 17.2, the sand in this 26 x 26-inch square
vertical exit was supported by a piece of 3/4-
inch exterior plywood, that should be of the
previously mentioned rot-proof type, pressure
impregnated with wood preservative.
Inthecenterofthis251f2x 251f2-inch plywood
sand-support was an 8-inch-diameter hole cov-
ered withtwo thicknessesofstrongnyloncloth.The double thickness of cloth was firmly at-
tached to the plywood by being folded over four
3/16-inch galvanized steel rods, that were
stapledtothe plywoodwith galvanizedpoultry-
netting staples. (See Figs. 17.2 and 17.3.) The
nylon cloth covering the hole can be easily and
quickly cut with a knife, permitting sand to fall
harmlessly into the shelter room.
I f..-23" CONCRETE R[M --l I
~ 25-[/2" BEMOVABLE SAND - SUPPORT----.:..j
f------ 26" Ex [T -------t
Fig. 17.3. Plan of Vertical Emergency Exit,
Before Filling with Sand.
As shown in Figs. 17.2 and 17.3, the square
26 x 26-inch plywood sand-support rests on a
llf2-inch-wide rim or ledge around the 23 x 23-
inch square hole in the shelter's reinforced
concrete roof slab. After a shelter occupant has
cutoutthe nylon cloth coveringthe hole and all
but about 30 lbs of sand has fallen or been
pushed by his hand down into the shelter room,
he can tilt the plywood sand-support up into a
vertical position, and then turn it 45 degrees.
The26-inch widthofthe sand-supportpermitsit
to be easily lifted down through the 32.5-inch-
long diagonal ofthe 23 x 23-inch square hole in
the shelter's roof slab.
Note the North-pointing arrow on the ply-
wood sand-support shown in Fig. 17.3. Because
the exit of this shelter was not made perfectly
square, the sand-support could be tilted most
easily from its horizontal position into the
vertical position if it was oriented so that its
side marked "N" wasto the north. A similar"N"
arrow on the lower side of this sand-support
enabled a man below it, after the exit's lid was
tied down and before the exit was filled with
sand, to position the sand-support for easy
tilting and removal when the last of the sand
was being cleared from this exit. The sand-
supportshouldbe cutto fit the exitaftertheexit
is completed, because it is difficult to build an
exit exactly to specified dimensions.
The top of the emergency exit should be a
few inches above the earth around it, to prevent
rainwateronthe groundfrom possiblyrunning
in. Securely cover the exit's top with a lid of
lI8-inch galvanized steel having a threaded
plug-hole (cutfrom a steelbarrel) weldedover a
hole cut in the lid's center. Such a lid can be
closely fitted to the top of a concrete exit by
oiling it and pressing it against the concrete
before the concrete begins to set.
Before filling the exit with sand, while
inside the exittiethe liddownoneachofitsfour
sides with nine loops of 3/32-inch nylon cord
repeatedly tightened between four galvanized
steel"V's" welded to the lower side of the lid,
and four" V's" set in the shelter's walls and
roof slab, as indicated in Fig. 17.2. Use pliers to
tighten, stretch, and hold the nylon cord while
makingtheloops. Then afterthe plywood sand-
support is positioned in the bottom of the exit,
the exit can be filled by pouring dry sand
through the plug-hold in the steel lid. Finally,
the plug-holeshould be closed so that it cannot
be opened, and then made waterproof. To make
doubly sure that the lid will not rust, paint it
with a cement paint, and then with whatever
color outdoor paint you want.
A shelter occupant can cut out the nylon
cloth covering the hole in the sand-support,
remove all sand and the plywood sand-support
from this exit, cutthe four tightenednylon-cord
multipleloopsholdingdown thelid,pushoffthe
lid, and then climb up and step outside - all in
less than 5minutes, evenifdamp sandhas been
used to fill the exit. (To make removal of the
sand more difficult, in his tests the author used
damp sand that does not flow freely and makes
it necessary to loosen it repeatedly, with one's
hand and arm thrust up through the 8-inch hole
in the plywood sand-support.)
In a well designed blast shelter this sand-
filled emergency exit will provide excellent
protection againstsevereblast. Blasttests have
proved that a 1/8-inch steel lid (the equivalent
of a blast door) the size of this exit's lid will
withstandblasteffectsofatleast50 psi. Further-
more, sand arching will transfer blast loadings
onthe sandoutwardfrom the slightlydownward
deflecting plywood sand-support to its edges,
andthencetothe supportingreinforcedconcreterim or ledge around the 23 x 23-inch hole in the
shelter's roof slab. (See Fig. 17.2.)
A small shelter with an emergency exit
near its far end has additional advantages: It
can be supplied with adequate natural ven-
tilation most of the time, with easy forced
ventilation by a KAP when forced ventilation is
needed, and with daylight illumination. Means
for attaining these advantages are described in
Appendix F. .
ADEQUATE STORAGE SPACE
FOR ESSENTIALS
As will be shown in the following sections
of this chapter, about 20 square feet of shelter
floor area per family member is needed for
shelter furnishings and to store adequate water
for a month, a year's supply of compact dry
foods, cooking and sanitary equipment, blan-
kets, tools, and other post-attack essentials.
Twenty square feet per family member also
provides enough space per person to store
winter clothing and footwear, camping equip-
ment, and foods normally kept on hand and
rotated as consumed in the course of ordinary
family living. Additional space is needed if you
plan to use your shelter as a workshop, or as a
fallout shelter to save a few ofyour unprepared
friends without endangering your own family.
SEATS/BUNKS/SHELVES
Seats and overhead bunks built like those
specified in Fig. 17.4 and pictured in Fig. 17.5
enable more shelter occupants to sit and sleep
more comfortably in -Iess space than when
using any other shelter furnishings known to
the author. Note that the seat has an adjustable
backrest. This backrest is similar to the fine-
mesh nylon fishnet backrests tested in a proto-
type of an expensive blast shelterdesigned and
furnished at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Shelter habitability tests have proved the
need for backrests. Even some young German
soldiers had painfully sore backs after sitting
on ordinary benches during a 2-week shelter
occupancy test.
Backrests should be installed in peacetime
and kept ready for crisis use, rolled up against
their upper attachments and covered. Then
easily removeable storage shelves, if needed,
can be installed between benches and overhead
bunks.
To sitorsleepcomfortably,pullthebedsheet
forward and then sit on about the outer foot of
the 2-foot-wide seat.
Although this 5-occupant shelter is illus-
trated with a bunk for each family member, it is
39" BETWEEN PAIRS OF 4".4" SUPPORTS
39"
----"''---------
NOTCHED
Fig. 17.4. Seat with Overhead BunkPropor-
tionedfor a ShelterRoomwith a 7-Ft. orHigher
Ceiling. A seat with a backrest should be 24
inches wide.
Fig. 17.5. Backrests of Bedsheet Cloth and
2-Inch-Thick Pads Make Sitting and Sleeping
Comfortable.
..J
..J
;prudent to count on stored supplies making
some bunks unusable, and to realize that in a
desperate crisis it might be hard to refuse
shelter to an unprepared good neighbor. Note
that with four persons seated on a 6.5-foot-Iong
seat and one person on the overhead bunk, five
personscan be quitecomfortablyaccommodated
on 25 square feet offloorspace, includingplenty
of room for the sitters' legs.
To store the most supplies in a shelter, you
should install shelves afteryou knowthe heights
of the itemsto be stored. Oftenthe space between
an overhead bunk and the ceiling can best be
used by making easily removeable additional
shelves.
WATER
• Water needs: Even most well-maintained
sheltersdo not haveenough waterfor prolonged
occupancy. A permanentsheltershould provide
each occupant with at least 30 gallons of safe
water - enough for an austere month, exceptin
very hot weather.
• Contafners: The most practical water con-
tainer for shelter storage is a 5-gallon rigid
plastic watercan with a handle, a largediameter
opening for quick filling and emptying, and a
small spout for pouring small quantities. A 5-
gallon watercan ofthis type sells for about$5 in
discount stores.
The plastic bottles that household chlorine
bleach is sold in also are good for multi-year
storage of drinking water, as are glass jugs.
Plastic milk jugs are not satisfactory, because
after a few years they often become brittle and
crack.
Some shelter owners do not realize that,
although a sheltercan bekeptdry in peacetime,
except in the arid Westits airis likelyto become
extremely humid after a few days of crowded
occupancy. Very humid air soon softens and
weakens cardboard containers of food and
flexible water bags.
• Disinfectingfor multi-yearstorage: To store
safe water and keep it safe for years, first
disinfect the container by rinsing it with a
strong solution ofchlorine bleach. Then rinse it
with safe water before filling it with the clear,
safe waterto be stored. Next, disinfectby adding
household bleach that contains 5.25% sodium
hypochlorite as its only active ingredient, in the
quantities specified in this book's Waterchapter
for disinfecting muddy or cloudy water. To 5
gallons, add 1scantteaspoon of bleach. Finally,
to prevent possible entry of air contaming
infective organisms through faulty closures,
seal the container's closures with duct tape.
• Making efficient use of storage space: A 5-
gallon rigid plastic water container typically
measures 7 x 12 x 21 inches, including the
heightof itsspout.Nine such5-galloncontainers
can be placed on a 2 x 3-footfloor area. Twenty-
seven 5-gallon containers, holding 135 gallons
ofwater, can be stored on and over6 square feet
offloor ifyou make a waterstorage stand24 x 42
x 48 inches high, built quite like the seat with
overhead bunk described in the Seats/Bunks/
Shelves section of this chapter. This easily
moveable storage stand should have two ply-
wood shelves, one 24 inches and the other 48
inches from the floor.
• Using filled containers for shielding: Filled
5-gallon watercontainerscanbemovedquickly
to provide additional shielding where needed to
increase the protection factor of all or part of a
shelter. For example, near the inner door of the
shelter illustrated by Figs. 17.1 and 17.2 the
protection factor is lessthan 1000. Butifenough
filled water containers are placed so as to cover
the door with almost the equivalent of an 18-
inch-thick "wall" of shielding water, the PF of
the partofthe shelter room nearthe doorcan be
raised to about PF 1000.
If a shelter has twenty-seven 5-gallon cans
ofwaterstoredonand undertheabove-described
2-shelf water storage stand, then in less than 3
minutes 2 men can shield the shelter door quite
adequately. All they have to do is take the 18
cans off the shelves, put 9 of them on the floor
againstthe door and doorway, movethe storage
stand over the 9 door-shielding cans, and place
the remaining 18 cans on the stand's 2 shelves.
Equally good doorway shielding can be
providedbyplacingatleasta 24-inch thickness
of containers full of dense food, such as whole-
grainwheator sugar, againstthedoorway. Two
55-gallon drums of wheat, each weighing about
400 pounds, can be quickly "walked" on a con-
crete floor and positioned so as to shield the
lower part of a doorway. Heavy containers on
the floor can provide a stable base on which to
stack other shielding material.
• A water well: The best solution to the water
problem quite often is a well inside the shelter.
In many areasthe watertable islessthan50 feet
belowthe surface, and a 50-foot well, casedwith
6-inch steel pipe, can be drilled and completed
for about $2000. Well drilling should be done
after the shelter excavation has been dug and
beforetheconcreteshelterfloorhas beenpoured.
An in-shelter well would be of vital importance
notonly to the occupants ofa family shelter, but
later on probably to nearby survivors. Even if
only a gallon or so an hour could be bailed froma well too weak to be useful in peacetime, it
wouldbe a tremendousfamily assetpost-attack.
Ifinfectiveorganismsarefound inwaterfrom a
welldrilledto providewaterduringandafteran
attack, safe water for months can be assured by
merely storing a few gallons of household
chlorine bleach.
If enough water for 'worthwhile peacetime
use can be pumped from a well, install a sub-
mersible electric pump, with plastic pipe in the
well. Then in an emergency the pipe and the
attached pump can be pulled by hand out ofthe
well, with only a saw being needed to cut off
lengths of the plastic pipe as it is pulled. After
the well casing has been cleared of pump, pipe
and wires, ahomemade 2-foot-Iong bail-bucket
on a nylon rope can be used-to draw plenty of
water. (See Chapter 8, Water, for instructions.)
• Local water sources: Most Americans' nor-
mal piped water would not run for months after
a large nuclear attack. A month's supply of
waterstoredinyoursheltershouldbeadequate, .
because, even ifyour area has heavy fallout, in
less than a month radioactive decay will make
it safe to haul water from nearby sources.
An important part ofyour shelter prepara-
tions is to locate nearby wells, ponds, streams,
and streambeds that when dry frequently have
water a foot or two below the surface. The
author has found that digging a water pit in an
apparentlydry streambedoftensuppliesenough
filtered water to satisfy several families' basic
needs. To keep the sides of a water pit dug in
unstable ground from caving in, you should
drive a circle of side-by-side stakes around the
outside of your planned pit before starting to
dig. With more work and materials, you and
othersurvivorsneedingfiltered watercoulddig
a well like the Chinese water source shown on
page 71. If you are in a fallout area, before
drinking water from a water. pit you should
filter it through clayey soil to remove fallout
particles and dissolved radioactive isotopes, as
described in the Water chapter. Of course it is
prudent to chlorinate or boil all surface and
near-surface water after it has been filtered.
FOOD
• Advantages of a one-year supply: A family
that expends the money and work to build and
provision its own shelter should store a year's
supply oflong-lastingfoods. Ifpost-attackcon-
ditionsenableyouto continuelivingandmaking
a living near your home, having a year's food
supply will be a tremendous advantage. And if
your area is afflicted with such dangerous,
continuing fallout radiation and!or other post-
attack conditions that surviving unprepared
residents are soon forced to evacuate to better
areas, thenyourandyourfamily's chanceswill
be better if hunger does not force you to move
during the chaotic first few months after a
nuclear attack.
• Costs of a one yearfood supplyfor a family
shelter: Table 17.1 shows the wide range of 1987
costs of the basic survival foods for multi-year
storagethatarelisted andexplainedonpage88.
The delivered costs listed in the right hand
column include UPS shipping charges in the
nearest and least expensive of UPS's 8 zones.
For UPS shipping costs to the most distant
points in the 48 states, add 34 cents per pound
delivered.
All the foods in this survival ration, if
stored in moisture-proof and insect-proof con-
tainers (the non-fat milk powder should be in
nitrogen-packed cans), will provide healthful
nutrition for at least 10 years. The exception is
the multi-vitamin tablets, which should be re-
placed every 2 or3 years, depending on storage
temperature. Soa family thatspendsabout$300
per member on such a one year survival ration
can consider that each of its members has been
covered by famine insurance for $30 a year.
Scurvywill be thefirst incapacitating,then
lethal vitamin deficiency to afflict unprepared,
uninformed Americans. A multi-vitamin tablet
contains enough vitamin C to fully satisfy the
daily requirement. However, a prudent shelter
owner also should store vitamin C tablets, that
keep for years. One hundred 500-mg generic
vitamin C tablets - 50,000 mgof vitamin C - in
1987 typically cost about $1.20 in a discount
store; a 10mgdailydose prevents scurvy. After
a nuclear war in some areas vitamin C will be
worth many times its weight in gold.
• SourcesafthebasicfoodslistedinTable17.1:
*Wheat: If you live in a wheat producing
area, the least expensive sources of ready-to-
store wheat usually are local seed-cleaning
firms. A hundredpoundsormoreofhardwheat,
dried, bagged, and ready to store in moisture
proof containers, costs about 10 cents a pound.
(Today the wheat farmer receives about 4.5
cents a pound for truckloads, usually straight
outofthefield, notdryenoughto storeexceptin
well ventilated granaries, and containing trash
that makes weevil infestations more likely.) In
some communities a few stores sell big bagsof
dry, cleaned hard wheat for 20 to 35 cents a
pound.
Shelterownerswho areunableorunwilling
to obtainwheatfrom such sourcescanbuyhighTable 17.1. A basic one-year survival ration for one adult male.
Component Ounces
per day
Pounds
per year
Range of 1987 retail
prices in dollars per
pound. FOB.
or picked up
Range of 1987 costs
in dollars for a one
year supply. FOB.
or picked up
Range of 1987 costs
in dollars for a one
year supply delivered
and in containers for
multi-year storage
Whole-kernel 16 365 0.10 to 0.40 36.50 to 135.00 56 to 175
hard wheat
Beans, pinto 5 114 0.25 to 0.79 28.50 to 90.11 38 to 110
Non-fat 2 46 1.68 to 3.86 77.28 to 177.56 83 to 184
milk powder
Vegetable oil 1 23 0.36 to 0.57 8.28 to 13.11 9 to 14
Sugar 2 46 0.25 to 0.30 11.50 to 13.80 16 to 20
Salt, iodized 1/3 B- 0.17 to 0.20 1.36 to 1.60 2 to 3
Multi-vitamin 1 per day 365 per year 1.3 to 11.8 cents 4.75 to 43.07 6 to 44
tablets (low generic, per tablet
and an expensive brand)
Total $ costs $210 to $550
protein hard wheat at higher prices from health
food stores and a few mail ordercompanies, The
lowest mail order FOB price known to the
authorfor hard westernwheatin 1990 is$3.17for
10pounds,ina vacuum-packedmetallizedplastic
bag similar to the containers used for some U.S.
Army combat rations. This long-Iastingwheat,
as well as other grains and legumes, is sold by
Preparedness Products, 3855 South 500 West,
Salt LakeCity, Utah84115. Anotherreliablemail
order source of wheat and other dry foods pack-
agedfor multi-yearstorageisTheSurvivalCen-
ter, 5555 Newton Falls Rd., Ravenna, Ohio 44266.
*Beans, like wheat, in many communities
can be purchased from local farmers' co-ops or
local stores at much lower delivered cost than
from mail order firms. In one small Colorado
town the co-op sold 25 pounds of pintobeans in a
polyethylene bag for $11.25-45 cents a pound.
Local supermarkets sell bulk pinto beans for
around 60 cents a pound.
*Non-fatmilkpowderin 1990 is soldnation-
wideinthelargercardboardpackagesfor around
$2.85 per pound. A better buy for multi-year
storage is the instant non-fat milk powder sold
byPreparedness Products. This Mormon-owned
firm's 1990 FOB price is $57.95 for a case of 6
nitrogen-packed cans, containing a total of 22.5
pounds. The author bought a case three years
ago and found this non-fat instant milk powder
to be excellent. At $2.58 a pound, plus UPS
shipping charges, the cost is considerably less
than for comparable milk powder packaged for
multi-yearstorage andsoldbyothercompanies.
* Vegetableoil,sugar,salt,andmulti-vitamin
tabletsarebestboughtatdiscountsupermarkets.
In cities such stores often sell large plastic
containers of vegetable oil as "loss leaders" to
attractcustomers,atpricesaslowaswholesale.
Vegetableoilprices in smallcommunitiestypi-
cally are much higher. For an economical sur-
vivalration, buythelowestpricedvegetableoil.
Remember that one of the worst post-attack
nutritionaldeficiencies willresultfrom chronic
shortagesoffats(includingoils), andthatbabies
andlittlechildrencannotsurvivefor a yearona
diet of only grains and beans, with no oil or fat.
See the Food chapter.
• CAUTIONS: Typical health food stores and
mostfirms that specializein survivalfoods sell
basic foods at high prices, especially grains,
beans, and milk powder. Investigate several
other sources before buying.
To make sure that an advertised "one year
supply" of survival foods actually will keep an
adult well nourished for a whole year, require
the seller to inform you by mail what his "one
year supply" provides a typical adult male in:
(1) calories, k cal; (2) protein, g; and (3) fat, g.
Then you can use the values in the "Emergency
Recommendations" columninTable9.1 onpage
84 to determine whether the advertised "one
year supply" is adequate,• Transitional foods: The emotional shock of
suddenly being forced by war to occupy your
shelter will be even worse if you have to adapt
suddenlyto anunaccustomeddiet. Itwouldbe a
good idea to occasionally practice eating only
your survival rations for a day or two, and to
store in your shelter a two week supply of
canned and dry foods similar to those your
family normally eats. Then it will be easier if
war forces you to make the changeover. Of
course the transitional foods that you store
should be rotated and replaced as needed, de-
pending on their shelf lives.
• A hand-cranked grain mill: Whole kernel
grains and soybeans must be processed into
meal or flour for satisfactory use as principal
components of a diet. If unprepared America
suffers a nuclear attack, unplanned, local food
reserves and/or famine relief shipments will
consist mostly ofunprocessed wheat, corn, and
soybeans. Then a family with a manual grain
mill will have a survival advantage and will be
a neighborhood asset.
Manyhealthfoodstoresatleasthavesources
of hand-cranked grain mills. Mills with steel
grinding plates are more efficient and less
expensive than "stone" mills. A mailorderfirm
that still sells hand-cranked grain mills of a
makethatthe authorhasboughtandfound to be
wellmadeandefficientisMoses KountryHealth
Foods, 7115 W. 4th N.W., Albuquerque, New
Mexico 87107. It sells a serviceable Polish mill
(Model "OB" Hand Grain Mill) for $35.73 FOB,
plus UPS shipping charges. This mill cranks
easilyand grinds wheatintocoarsemealorfine
_flour more efficiently than any ofthe American
manual grain mills that the author has bought
and used over the decades. Apparently manual
grain mills no longer are manufactured in the
U.S. Before buying a grain mill be sure to learn
whetherit grinds corn, ourlargestfood reserve.
In 1987 the author bought an advertised West
German mill. Only after receiving it by mail
orderdidhelearn byreadingthe accompanying
directions that it is not made for grinding corn.
COOKING AND HEATING
• Safety precautions: The first rule for safe
cookingand/or heatingin a shelteris todo it as
near as practical to the exhaust opening. If the
fire isunderanexhaustpipe, install a hood over
the fire. Operate the shelter ventilating pump
when cooking, unless a natural airflow out
throughtheexhaustopeningcan be observedor
felt. Keepflammablematertals,especiallycloth-
ing, well away from any open fire.
• Hazardous fuels: Charcoal is the most haz-
ardous fuel to burn in confined spaces, because
itgivesoffmuchcarbonmonoxide.In a crowded
shelter there are obvious dangers in using the
efficient little stoves carried by backpackers
andinstoringtheireasilyvaporized andignited
fuels.
• "Canned heat": These convenient fuels are
expensive. Sterno, widely used to heat small
quantities offood and drink, typically retails in
7-ounce cans for what amounts to about $9.00
per pound.
• Wood: The safest fuel to burn in a shelter is
wood, the most widely available and cheapest
fuel. Furthermore, wood smoke is irritating
enough to usually alert shelter occupants to
some.times accompanying carbon monoxide
dangers. Scrap lumber cut into short lengths,
made into bundles and stored in plastic bags,
occupies minimum spaceand staysdry. Keep a
saw and a hatchet in your shelter.
• Bucket Stove: The most efficient, practical
and safe stove with which to cook or heat for
weeks or months in a family shelteris a Bucket
Stove, that burns either small pieces of wood or
small "sticks" of twisted newspaper. (See the
Food chapter.) Especially if you believe that
you mayhaveto live inyourshelterfor months
or that your normal fuel will not be available
after a'nuclear attack, you should make and
store at least two Bucket Stoves.
• An improved Fireless Cooker: To save a
great deal of fuel and time, particularly with
slow-cooking grains and beans, make a very
well insulated Fireless Cooker similar to the
expedient one described on page 82 of the Food
chapter. Make a plywood box, first measuring
carefully to insure that, when completely lined
with 4 inches of styrofoam, the styrofoam will
fit closelyaround a large, liddedpotwrappedin
a bath towel. An excellent Fireless Cooker is a
war survival asset that also is useful for peace-
time cooking.
(To boil about twice as much wheat flour-
meal in a given pot as can be boiled when
making wheat mush, and to use the minimum
amount of water and fuel, salt a batch of the
flour-meal, add enough water while working it
to make a stiff dough, then make dough balls
about 11/2 inches in diameter, and roll them in
flour-meal. Drop the wheat balls into enough
boilingwaterto coverthem, andboilata rolling
boilfor 10minutes. Then puttheboiling-hotpot
in a well insulated Fireless Cooker for several
hours. Cornballscan be made andboiledinthismanner, also without the almost constant stir-
ring required when boiling a mush made of
home-ground flour-meal.)
• A sturdyworkbench: Inthecornerunderthe
emergencyexitbuild a work bench, securedto a
wall, on which to cook and to which you can
attach your grain mill, A bench36 inches high,
42 inches wide, and 30 inches deep will serve.
(The other corner at the air-exhaust end of the
shelter should be the curtained-off toilet and
bathing area.)
• Verywarmclothing,footwear,andbedding:
Heating a well ventilated shelter usually is
unnecessary even .in freezing weather if the
occupantshavetheseessentials for livinginthe
cold, or if they have the materials'needed to
make at least as good expedient means for
retaining body heat as are described in Chapter
15. The author has felt the warm hands of little
Chinesechildrenwearingpaddedclothingwhile
living in their below freezing homes, where
there was scarcely enough straw, grass, and
twigs to cook with. Ifyou store plenty of strong
thread and large needles in your shelter, you
can make warm clothing out of blankets - as
some frontier settlers did to survive the sub-
zero winters of Montana.
LIGHT
• White paint: To make a little light go a long
way, paint the walls, ceiling, floor, and fur-
nishings pure white.
• Candles: Themostdependable andeconomi-
cal lights for a family shelter are long-burning
candles. The best candle tested by the author is
the 15-hour candle manufactured by the Reed
Candle Company of San Antonio, Texas and
sold by the millions in New Mexico each
Christmas season for use in outdoor decorative
"Iuminarias". This votive-type, short candle is
not perfumed and has a wick supported by a
small piece of metal attached to its base, so that
the wick remains uprightandcontinues to burn
if the wax melts and no longer supports it. If
burned in one of the candle-lamps described
below, this candle gives enough lightto read by
for 15 hours.
The author has been able to find only one
mail order source of 15-hour candles like those
sold by the millions in New Mexico: Prepared-
ness Products, 3855 South 500 West, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84115. A case of 144 candles sells for
$49.00, FOB in 1990. When UPS shippingcharges
are added, the delivered costis between'35and40
cents for each 15-hour candle, depending on the
distance shipped.
Persons who stock a permanent shelter
should realize that after a nuclear war fats, oils,
paraffin, and all other sources of light will be in
extremely short supply for at least many
months. Light at a delivered cost of about two
cents per hour will be a bargain blessing.
* The second-best shelter candle tested by
the author is a standard Plumber's Candle, that
retails for about 60 cents in many stores nation-
wide, and that burns for about 10 hours with a
brighter flame than a votive-type candle.
Two types of expedient candle-lamps were
proved by multi-day tests to be the most prac-
tical:
* The best expedient candle-lamp is made of
a 1-pint Mason, jar, identical to the cooking-oil
lamp pictured on page 102 of the Light chapter
except for the substitution of a short candle for
the oil and wick. To make a stable candle base
on a glass jar's rounded bottom, cover it with
hot candle wax. To be able to light the candle
and then put it inside the glass jar, make tongs
outofan 18-inchlengthofcoathangerwire bent
in the middle, with each of its two ends bent
inward 90 degrees and cut off to make 1/4-inch-
long candle grippers.
*Thesecond-bestcandle-
lamp is made by cutting a
standard aluminum pop or
beercan, as illustrated. Use
a sharp small knife. To
make a stable base for a
short candle, put enough
sandacrossthecan'sround-
ed bottom to barely cover
-its center. The first candle
burned will saturate and
then hardenthe sand,mak-
ing a permanent candle
base or holder.
Caution: Although candles are the safest
non-electric lights for shelter use, they produce
enough carbonmonoxide to causeheadaches in
a poorly ventilated, long-occupied shelter. In a
2-week habitability test of a family shelter in
Princeton, the father and mother did not smoke,
yet they had persistent headaches. Specialists
laterconcludedthattheirheadacheswerecaused
by the small amounts of carbon monoxide pro-
duced by the candles used both for light and to
heat food and drink.
• Expedientlamps:Theveryeconomicallamp
that burns cookingoil in a 1-pintglass jaristhebetter of the two expedient lamps pictured on
page 102. For use in a shelter, however, long-
burning candles, that are serviceable after
decades of storage, are more practical. Among
thedisadvantagesof expedientlamps isthefact
thatuntreated, softcottonstringneededtomake
excellent wicks is no longer available in some
communities, and making wire-stiffened wicks
is a time consuming chore.
• Other light sources: See the Light chapter.
NYLON HAMMOCK-CHAIRS
To enable the maximum number of addi-
tional people to occupy a shelter for days to
months,nylonHammock-Chairsshouldbe made
before a war crisis arises, 'and should be kept
stored for emergency use. The best field-tested
model for use in shelters that are at least 7 feet
wide is similar to the expedient Hammock-
Chair described on pages 120 through 124, is
made of strong nylon cloth, and is 40 inches
wide by 9 feet long along its center line, with
each of its long sides being 8 feet-4 inches long.
At each end is a curved hem 31/2 inches wide,
through which a loop-ended nylon hammock
rope is run, to draw the slung hammock into a
boat-like, secure shape with adequate head and
shoulder room. The breaking strength of a
hammock rope should be at least 600 pounds.
To attach the nylon ropes that-support the
suspended chair's two "arms," a loop of nylon
webbing, or of folded and stitched nylon cloth,
shouldbe sewnto eachsideedgeof thehammock
52 inches from the end of the hammockthatwill
serve as the top of the back of the chair. See the
illustrations on page 124. Especially in per-
manent family shelters, support points both for
the hammocks, and for the hammocks when
they areconvertedintosuspendedchairs, should
be made when the shelter is being built.
OFTEN OVERLOOKED SANITATION
AND OTHER SHELTER NEEDS
Storeenoughsoaptolastyourfamily for at
least a year. After a major nuclear attack the
edible fats and oils, used in past generations to
make soap, will almost all be eaten. Production
of detergents is based on inter-dependent, vul-
nerable chemical industries not likely to be
restored for years.
A chemicaltoiletwouldhelpbridgethegap
between modern living and surviving in a
crowded shelter. For months-long occupancy,
however, a more practicaltoilet is likelyto be a
5-gallon can with a seat, a plastic trash bagfor
its removableliner, a pieceofplasticfilmforits
tie-on cover, and a hose to vent gasses to the
outdoors. See page 104. Store at least 200 large
plastic trash bags.
The author knows from his experiences in
primitive regions that using anything other
than paper in place of toilet paper or cloth is
hard to get accustomed to. A hundred pounds of
newspaper, stored in plastic trash bags to pre-
ventitfrom gettingdamp,takesuponly about3
cubic feet of storage space and would be useful
for many purposes.
Keep several thousand matches, in Mason
jars, so that they will be sure to stay dry even if
your shelter becomes very humid post-attack.
Store most of your radiation monitoring
instruments in your shelter, along with paper
and pencils with which to keep records of
radiation exposures, etc. A steel or reinforced
concrete shelter should have a transistor radio
withextrabatteries,anda verticalpipethrough
which an antenna can be run up to improve
reception.
No one can remember all the needed sur-
vival facts and instructions given even in this
one book, so keep Nuclear War Survival Skills and
other survival guidance in your shelter, and
also other books that you believe may improve
your family's morale and survival chances.·
PRACTICE SHELTER LIVING
A familythat spends a weekendlivinginits
completed small shelter will learn more about
unrecognized shelter needs - and more about
eachother- thanmembers arelikelytolearnif
they all read civil defense information for two
whole days. Furthermore,afterthiseducational
experience family members oldenough to have
nuclear fears will know for sure that anti-
defense activists are talking nonsense when
they maintain that ifmost Americans had shel-
ters they would become less heedful of nuclear
wardangers andmorelikelytosupportaggres-
sive leaders.Chapter 18
Trans-Pacific Fallout
POTENTIAL DANGERS TO AMERICANS
Many strategists believe that if a nuclear
warisfought inthenextfew decadesitprobably
will not involve nuclear explosions on any of
our 50 states. Perhaps the first nuclear war
casualties inthe UnitedStates willbe causedby
fallout from an overseas nuclear war in which
our country is not a belligerent. As the number
of nations with nuclear weapons increases -
especially in the Middle East - this generally
unrecognizeddangertoAmericans willworsen.
Trans-Pacific warfallout, carriedto anAmerica
at peace by the prevailing west-to-east winds
that blow around the world, could be several
hundred times more dangerous to Americans
than fallout from the worst possible overseas
nuclearpowerreactoraccident, andmanytimes
more dangerous than fallout from a very im-
probableU.S. nuclearpowerreactoraccidentas
lethal asthedisastrous Chernobylaccidentwas
to Russians.
Fig. 1 is a map showing fallout from a
single above ground Chinese nuclear test ex-
plosion("afew hundredkilotons") onDecember
ORNL DWG, 73-4611
Fig. 1.The Fifth Chinese Nuclear Test was Detonated on Dec. 28, 1966.It"involved thermonuclear material,"and,
according to the AEC press release, was a "nuclear test in the atmosphere at their test site near Lop Nor." As indicated
above, by the end of Dec. 31, 1966 the leading edge of its fallout cloud extended as far east as the dotted line shown
running from Arizona to the Great Lakes.28, 1966. It produced fallout that by January 1,
1967 resulted in the fallout cloud covering most
of the UnitedStates.This one Chineseexplosion
produced about 15 million curies of iodine-131
- roughly the same amount as the total release
of iodine-131 into the atmosphere from the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster. (The
LawrenceLivermoreNationalLaboratory'spre-
liminaryestimateis that.l0-50 million curies of
iodine-131 were released during the several
days of the Chernobyl disaster; in contrast, its
estimate of the iodine-131 released during the
ThreeMile Islandnuclearpowerplantaccident,
the worst commercial nuclear power plant ac-
cident in American history, is about 20 curies.)
Fig. 1isfrom anOakRidge NationalLabora-
tory report, Trans-Pacific Fallout and Protective
Countermeasures (ORNL-4900), written by the
author of this book in 1970, but not published
until 1973. No classified information was used
in any version of this report, that summarized
findings of the unclassified Trans-Pacific Fall-
out Seminar funded by the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission. This seminar' was attended by
expertswhocamefrom severalresearchorgani-
zations and deliberated at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory for two days in March of 1970.
Later in 1970 a final draft of this report was
submitted to Washington for approval before
publication. It was promptly classified. Publi-
cation without censorship was not permitted
until after it was declassified in its entirety in
1973. None of the recommendations in this
pioneering report were acted upon, but many of
them are given in this chapter.
The findings and conclusions of the above
mentioned 1970OakRidge NationalLaboratory
Trans-Pacific Fallout Seminar, summarized in
the 1973 report, were confirmed by a later, more
comprehensive study, Assessment and Control of
the Transoceanic Fallout Threat, byH. Lee andW.E.
Strope (1974; 117 pages), Report EGU 2981 of
Stanford Research Institute.
Fallout from the approximately 300 kiloton
Chinese test explosion shown in Fig. 1 caused
milk from cows that fed on pastures near Oak
Ridge, Tennessee and elsewhere to be contami-
natedwithradioiodine, althoughnotwithenough
to be hazardous to health. However, this milk
contamination (up to 900 picocuries of radio-
active iodine per liter) and the measured dose
ratesfrom the gammaraysemittedfrom fallout
particles deposited in different parts of the
United States indicate that trans-Pacific fallout
from even an overseas nuclear war in which
"only"two orthreehundredmegatons wouldbe
exploded could result in tens of thousands of
unpreparedAmericans sufferingthyroidinjury.
Unprepared Americans do not have potassium
iodide, the very effective prophylactic medica-
tion to prevent thyroid injury from radioiodine,
andfew could getitduringthe severaldaysthat
it would take trans-Pacific war fallout to reach
the United States. Fortunately, removal of even
a cancerous thyroid rarely is fatal to people
blessed with modern medical facilities.
Only about 7,500 Americans (people living
within a few miles of a nuclear power plant in
Tennessee) have been given prophylactic po-
tassium iodide to keep in their homes. No
government organization has advised even
Americans living near other nuclear facilities
to buy and keep any kind of prophylactic medi-
cine to protect their thyroids in case of a peace-
time nuclear accident. As expected, official
warnings and advice to the public continue not
even to mention preparations that individual
Americans could make to protect themselves
and their families against thyroid injury either
from trans-Pacific war fallout deposited on an
America at peace, or as a result of war fallout if
our country is subjected to a nuclear attack.
TheworstdangertoAmericansfrom trans-
Pacific fallout from a large nuclear war would
be the whole-body gamma radiation doses that
millions would receive from fallout particles
deposited on the ground, on streets, on and in
buildings. Protective countermeasures would
include both sheltering some pregnant women
and small children living in "hot spot" areas of
abnormally high rain-out of fallout, and evacu-
ating others. Unless such unavoidably time-
consuming and expensive countermeasures
weretaken, severalthousand additionalAmeri-
cans might die from cancer in the following 20
or 30 years. The largest total doses would be
received by people who would live normal
unsheltered lives for the first month or so after
fallout deposition, whilethe doserates wouldbe
highest.
Several thousand additional cancer deaths
would be extremely difficult to detect, if caused
by whole-body gamma radiation from fallout
deposited nationwide, with these scattered
deaths occurring over the 20 or 30 years follow-
ing a trans-Pacific war fallout disaster. For
during these same decades about 15 million
Americans normally would die from cancers
indistinguishable from those caused by whole-
body radiation from warfallout depositedon an
America at peace.
An authoritative risk estimate of getting
cancer from low doses of radiation is given in
Report No. 77 (March 15, 1984) of the National
Council on Radiation Protection and Measure-
ment, "Exposures from the Uranium Serieswith Emphasis on Radon and Its Daughters":
"The low dose model for total excess
cancer mortality is one hundred cases
per million people exposed to one rem
uniform whole body radiation. This
would maketheoverallriskofcancerto
the averageindividualinthepopulation
aboutone intenthousandperrem, i.e., if
ten thousand persons are exposed to a
dose of one rem (one thousand mrem),
one excess [fatal] cancer would be ex-
pected within the lifetime of the group."
Many radiation specialists have concluded
from studies of the effects of extremely low
doses that the above and similar conservative
estimates of excess cancerdeaths overestimate
the numberof fatalities likelytoresultfrom low
radiation doses, such as would be received by
millions of Americans from trans-Pacific war
fallout.
TO PROTECT YOURSELF AGAINST
TRANS-PACIFIC FALLOUT, START BY
REALIZING THAT:
• The dangers from trans-Pacific war fallout
have been increased by the continuing trend
toward deployment of more accurate, smaller,
more numerous nuclear weapons, because:
* A large nuclear explosion (half a mega-
ton, ormore) injects mostof itsfallout particles
and gases into the stratosphere, above the tops
of clouds and above the altitudes at which quite
prompt removal of contaminants from the at-
mosphere by scavenging takes place. Very
small particles in the stratosphere do not reach
thegroundbeforethey areblownatleastseveral
thousand miles. Most of these tiny particles
remain airborne for weeks to years, are very
widely dispersed, and are blown around the
world several to many times before being de-
posited. By then the radioactivity of iodine-131
(that has a half life of only a little more than 8
days) is so greatly reduced that it is not nearly
as dangerous as is radioactive iodine deposited
much sooner with the fallout from smaller
weapons of several hundred kilotons, or less,
explosive power.
* Nuclear explosions smaller than about
half a megaton (500 kilotons) inject all or most
of their fallout to lower altitudes - within the
troposphere, below the stratosphere. Most of
such fallout is deposited during the radioactive
cloud'sfirst world-circlingtrip, wheneven quite
rapidlydecayingradioiodine stillisdangerous-
lyradioactive.This greaterdangerfrpm smaller
nuclearweapons has been provedby numerous
measurements of fallout from many nuclear
test explosions, both foreign and American.
• The dangers from trans-Pacific fallout pro-
duced by peacetime nuclear accidents are not
nearly as serious as many Americans have
been led to believe. Forexample, the Chernobyl
nuclearpowerreactoraccidentinjectedasmuch
radioactiveiodineintothe atmosphere aswould
theexplosionsof severalkiloton-range nuclear
weapons totaling perhaps as much as half a
megaton in explosive power. But not nearly as
muchoftheradioactivitycausedbythisreactor
accident reached the United States as would
reachus from severalnuclearexplosions inthe
same area, capableofinjectinganequalamount
of radioactivity into the atmosphere, because:
* The cloud from the steam explosion that
blew off the roof and otherwise damaged the
Chernobyl reactor building, may have risen
quite soon to 20,000 feet or more and was
partially blown eastwardclear across Asia and
the Pacific Ocean. However, the top of the
radioactive smoke cloud over the Chernobyl
power plant, that burned for days, rose only
about 3,000 feet above the ground. As a result,
muchof theairborneChernobyIradiation stayed
at relatively low altitudes where scavenging
(removal) of smoke and fallout particles and
gasses is mosteffectiveandrapid, dueto aggre-
gation on cloud droplets, rain-out, and dry
deposition. In contrast, almost all ofthe fallout
particles andradioactive gassesfrom a nuclear
explosionare injectedmuchhigher,to altitudes
where scavenging is less effective; there, the
generallyprevailingwest-to-eastwindsprompt-
ly start transporting very small particles and
radioactive gasses (that originate in the mid-
latitudes of the northern hemisphere) around
the world.
* Variable winds for days carried much of
the Chernobyl radioactive material northward
to Scandanavian countries, then westward and
southward to other European countries. The
resultant wide dispersal of this fallout allowed
timefor bothscavengingand radioactivedecay
before a small fraction of these invisible radio-
activecloudsrose andalsowereblowneastward
by the prevailing high-altitude winds. These
west winds carried an extremely smallfraction
of the radioactive emissions from the burning
Chernobyl plant clear across Asia and the
Pacific to America.
• The media habitually exaggerate dangers
from nuclear accidents, and exploited the Cher-
nobyl disaster. For example, when Dr. Robert
Gale, the leading bone marrow transplant spe-
cialistwhohelpedsave a fewChernobylvictims,
first returnedfrom Russia, an AssociatedPress
article quoted him as saying: "I think we can
say there are at least 50,000 to 100,000 peoplewho have had some dose of radiation which
might be of long-term concern. There will,
unfortunately, be additional casualties. We hope
the number will be small." The Rocky Mountain
News headlined"100,000SOVIETS TO SUFFER
FROM RADIATION, DOCTOR SAYS". Mary
McGrory, the syndicated liberal columnist, also
misinterpreted Dr. Gaie's risk estimate and
misinformed her readers- by writing: "He [Dr.
Gale] estimatedthatthere couldbe 100,000cases
of radiation sickness ...". Such dramatic news
items givethe impression that 100,000Russians
- not justa small fraction ofthat number - are
likely to suffer sickness or death from the
Chernobylradiation. So additionaltypicalAmer-
icans, reading misinformation of this type and
knowingverylittle about statisticalevaluations
of risks based on probabilities, have had their
worst nuclear fears strengthened.
The public's exaggeratedfears ofextremely
small amounts of. radiation also are worsened
by the media's use withoutexplanations ofvery
small units of radiation measurement, including
the picocurie. (The picocurie is used to express
the radioactive contamination of milk, water,
etc., and is only one millionth of a millionth
[1/1,000,000,000,000] of a curie.) One episode in
which fears of radiation were thus worsened
occurred shortly afterthe invisible fallout cloud
from the Chernobyl disaster first reached the
United States. Some listeners were'frightened
when a radio announcer merely statedthat milk
samples in northwest Oregon showed 118 pico-
curiesperIiterof radioactive iodine. FewAmeri-
cans know that they will not be advised to stop
using fresh milk unless its contamination is
15,000 picocuries ormore perliter- as specified
in the Food and Drug Administration's official.
very cautious "Protective Action Guidance",
published in the Federal Register of October 22,
1982.
The maximum measured radioactive con-
tamination of milk in the United States by
iodine-131 from the Chernobyl disaster was in
milk produced by cows grazing on pasture in
Washington: 560 picocuries per liter. The much
greaterpotentialdangerfrom trans-Pacificwar
fallout isbroughtoutbythefact thatthe approx-
imately 300-kiloton Chinese test explosion of
December 28, 1966 resulted in worse iodine-131
contamination of milk produced by a cow
grazing on pasture near Oak Ridge, Tennessee:
900 picocuries per liter. Even a small overseas
nuclear war with only 20 or so kiloton-range
nuclear explosions could cause high enough
contamination of milk to result in the Govern-
ment'swarningAmericansto refrainfrom using
fresh milk. Most Americans would heed this
warning and would not drink or otherwise use
fresh milk for weeks. In addition, a small over-
seas nuclear war possibly would cause a few
American casualties years to decades later.
TWO SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS
1. Trans-Pacific warfallout depositedon an
Americaat peacesurely would be a disaster, but
not an overwhelming one. The economic and
psychological impact probably would be more
damaging than the losses of health and life.
2. Prudentindividualsshouldmake prepara-
tions to enable them to use the low cost protec-
tive countermeasures described in this book,
especially those in Chapter 13.Some of the most
effective countermeasures, such as getting
enough prophylactic potassium iodide to pre-
ventthyroiddamageevenifwarfallout dangers
from explosions inthe UnitedStatesoroverseas
were to continue for a couple of months, cannot
be accomplished aftereven anoverseasnuclear
war begins.Appendix A
Instructions for Six Expedient Fallout Shelters
SHELTER-BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
The following step-by-step instructions for
building 6 types of earth-eovered expedient shelters
have enabled untrained families to build even the
most difficult of these shelters in lessthan 2days. The
only families who took longer- up to 4 days were
the few who were delayed by very heavy rains. Each
of these shelters has been built by several different
families or groups of families. Only widely available
materials and hand tools are required. They have
been built under simulated crisis conditions in
environments typical of large regions of the United
States: covered-trench types have been built in
forested clay hills of Tennessee. in a bare Colorado
\ alley in snowy November. inan irrigated Utah valley
in hot August. Most ofthe aboveground shelters were
built by families in Florida. where the water table is
within 18 inches of the surface.
All of these test families used instructions that
contained general guidance to help inexperienced
persons build almost any type of earth-covered
shelter. In this appendix. general instructions which
apply to all types of shelters will be given first. to
avoid repetition. (However. if the instructions for
building one type of shelter are reproduced
separately. the pertinent parts of these general
instructions should be given before the step-by-step
instructions for building that shelter.
WARNING
Earth-covered shelters built of green poles
canbecomeunsafe withina few months, because
of fungi and/or boring insects. In damper parts
of the U.S., earth-covered shelters built of dry
poles or untreated lumber can become unsafe
after several months. An exception is very dry
areasoftheWest, where some pioneers livedfor
years in earth-covered dugouts with pole roofs.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING
AN EXPEDIENT SHELTER
I. Read all the instructions and study the drawings
before beginning work. (Most families have
found it helpful first to read the instructions
aloud and then to discuss problems and work
assignments.)
2. Sharpen all tools, including picks and shovels.
Dull tools waste time and energy. If no file is
available, tools can be sharpened by rubbing
them hard on concrete or a rough stone.
3. Wear gloves from the start. Blisters can lead to
serious infections, especially ifantibiotics cannot
be obtained.'
4. Whenever practical, select a building site that:
• Will not be flooded if heavy rains occur or if
a large dam farther up a major valley isdestroyed
by a nuclear explosion.
• Is in the open and at least 50 ft away from a
building or woods that might be set afire by the
thermal pulse from an explosion tens of miles
away. (Keep well away from even a lone tree; it is
hard to dig through roots.)
• Has earth that is firm and stable, if the
planned shelter is to be a trench type with
unshored (unsupported) earth walls. To make
sure that the earth is firm and stable enough so
that the walls will not cave in, make a "thumb-
test" by digging an l8-in.-deep hole and trying to
push your bare thumb into the undisturbed earth
at the bottom. If you can push your thumb no
farther than I in., the earth should be safe
enough. If the earth does not pass the thumb-test,
move to another location and repeat the test. Or
build a belowground shelter with shored walls,
or an aboveground shelter.
• Has a sufficient depth ofearth above rock or
the water table for a trenchto be dug to the depthrequired. (To find out, try to dig a pit to the
required depth before excavating the whole
trench. Or, ifyou are quite sure there isno water-
table problem, try driving down a sharpened rod
or pipe to the required depth in several places
along the planned length of the trench.)
5. If the shelter must be built on sloping ground,
locate it with its length crosswise to the direction
of the slope.
6. Before staking out the shelter, clearthe ground of
brush, weeds and tall grass over an area
extending about 10 ft beyond the planned edges
of the excavation. (If loose earth isshoveled onto
tall plants, the earth will be difficult to shovel the
second time when coveringthe completed shelter
roof.)
7. Stake out the complete shelter, and then dig by
removing layers of earth.
8. When digging 'earth that is too firm to shovel
without first breaking it up, start picking (or
breaking with a shovel) in aline across the center
of the trench. Next, shovel out a narrow trench 6
or 8 in. deep all the way across the width of the
trench. Then with pick or shovel break off row
after row of earth all the way across the width of
the trench, as illustrated.
OltNL-DWG ~1a12
9. When digging a trench, to avoid having to move
the excavated earth twice more to get itout of the
way, first pile all earth about 8 ft away from the
trench. Later, pile additional earth you are
excavating at least 3 ft away.
10. Never risk a cave-in bydigging into lower parts of
an earth wall. It is dangerous to produce even a
small overhanging section of wall or to dig a
small, cave-like enlargement of a shelter.
11. When making a "sandbag" of a pillowcase or
sack to hold earth shielding in place around the
sides of shelter openings or along the edges of a
shelter roof, fill it so that it will be only about
two-thirds full after its opening is tied shut
securely. Avoid dropping the sandbag.
12. If sufficient sandbags are not available, make
earth-filled "rolls." Bed sheets or any reasonably
strong fabric or plastic film can be used to make
these rolls as described below. (To makea longer
roll than the one illustrated below, several
persons should make one together, standingside-
by-side.)
To make an 8-in.-high earth-filled roll:
(I) Select a piece of cloth at least as strong as a
new bed sheet, 2 ft longer than the side of the
opening to be protected, and 5 ft wide.
(2)' Place 2 ft of the width of the cloth on the
ground, as illustrated.
ORNL-DWG 78-16213
(3) While using both hands to hold up and pull
on 3 ft of the width of the cloth and pressing
against the cloth with your body, have
another person shovelearth onto and against
the cloth.
(4) While still pulling on the cloth, pull the upper
part down over the earth that covers the
lower part of the cloth.(5) Cover the upper part of the cloth with earth
so as to form an earth-filled "hook" near the
upper edge, as illustrated.
ORNL-DWG 78-16214
SLOPE EARTH TO DRAIN
CLOTH
FINISHED 8 in. ROLL
(6) If a greater thickness of rolls is needed, level
the earth on top of a roll; then make anotner
earth-filled roll on this level surface.
13. Cut and haul poles and logs more easily bydoing
the following:
(I) Take time to sharpen your tools before
starting to work-no matter how rushed you
feel.
(2) When sawing green trees that have gummy
resin or sap, oil your saw with kerosene or
diesel fuel. Ifyou don't have these, use motor
oil, grease, or even soap.
(3) When felling a small tree, the following
method will help make a square cut, keep
your saw from being pinched, and help make
the tree fall in the desired direction: (a) Saw
the tree about one-third through on the side
toward which you want it to fall. (b) Then
start sawing the opposite side, while another
person pushes on the tree with a IO-ftpush-
pole. pressing the end of the. push-pole
against the tree about lOft above the ground.
A push-pole with a forked end-s-or with a big
nail on the end-is best.
(4) After a tree has been felled, trim off all limbs
and knots so that the pole or log is smooth
and will require no additional smoothing
ORNL-DWG 78-16210
when you get ready to move it, or to use itfor
building your shelter. Make and use a
measuring stick to speed up measuring and
cutting poles and logs to the right lengths.
(5) It usually is best first to cut the poles exactly
two or threetimes the final length of the poles
to be used in the shelter.
(6) When you are ready to move the poles to the
shelter site, drag them rather than trying to
carry them on your shoulders. Shouldering
them is more tiring, and you could injure
yourself severely if you should trip.
To drag a log or several poles by hand: (a) Cut a
stick 2 to i/2 in. in diameter and about 3113 ft long; (b)
Tie a short piece of 1/4-in. (or stronger) rope to the
center of the stick; (c) Make a lasso-like loop at the
free end of the rope, so that when it is looped around
the log and two people are pulling (see illustration),
the front end of the log is raised about 6 in. abovethe
ground. The loop should be tightened around the log
about 2 ft. from its end, so that the end of the log
cannot hit the backs of the legs of the two people
pulling it.
ORNL-DWG 78-16211
2 TO 2-1/2 IN.
DIAMETER STICK
40 IN. LONG
CAUTION: If you drag a log down a steep hill, one
person should tie a rope to the rearend of the log, and
then follow the dragger, ready to act as the brake if
needed.
LIMB CUT OFF, TO HOOK OVER THE SQUARE·CUT END OF THE POLE.
~...~_-----DESIRED POLE LENGTH
l
(7) When you get the poles or logs to the location
where you will build the shelter, cut them to
the desired minimumdiameters and specified
lengths, and put all those of one specifiedtype together. Besure that thediameterofthe
smallend ofeach poleofone type isat least as
large as the minimum diameter specified for
its type. Make and use a measuring stick, as
previously described.
14. Use snow for shielding materialfor aboveground
shelters if the earth is so deep-frozen thatdigging
is impractical. For a Ridge-Pole Shelter (see
Appendix A.5), cover the entire shelter with 5 ft
of wetted or well-packed snow. For a Crib-
Walled Shelter (see Appendix A.6), fill the cribs
and then cover and surround the entire shelter
with snow at least 5 ft thick. With wetted orwell-
packed snow 5 ft thick, the protection factor is
about 50. Families have completed these winter
shelters within 2 days.
Several hundred pounds of snow can be
moved at a time by sledding it on a piece of
canvas or other strong material 6 to 8 ft wide.
Attach a stick across one end ofthe material and
tie a rope to the ends ofthe stick, so as to form a
"Y" bridle on which a person can pull.
To keep the occupants of a snow-covered
expedient shelter dry and tolerably warm in sub-
freezing weather, provide sufficient ventilation
openings to maintain inside temperatures at a
few degrees below freezing. (See Chapter 14,
Expedient Clothing.)
15. Make a reliable canopy over the shelterentry. By
following the instructions given in Fig. A on the
following page, you can make a dependable
canopy that ordinary winds will neither tear nor
blow down and that will not catch
rainwater-even if you have no waterproof
material stronger than 4-mil polyethylene film.
16. Take to your shelter enough window screen or
mosquito netting to cover its openings. Except in
freezing-cold weather, flies and mosquitoes
would soon become a problem in most localities
soon after an attack.
17. Work to complete (1) an expedient ventilating-
cooling pump (a KAP) and (2) the storage of at
least 15 gallons of water per person. This work
should be accomplished by the time your shelter
is completed. Especially in an area of heavy
fallout during warm or hot weather, an earth-
covered, high-protection-factor shelter when full
of people would be useless unless adequately
ventilated and cooled and provided with enough
water.
18. In cold weather, restrict air flow through the
shelter by hanging curtains of plastic or tightly
woven fabric, or by otherwise partially
obstructing its two openings. Always be sure to
leave at leasta few square inches open at thefloor
level of one opening and at the ceiling height of
the other, to provide enough ventilation to
prevent a harmful concentration of exhaled
carbon dioxide. To prevent exhaled water vapor
from wetting clothing and bedding and reducing
its insulatingvalue, keep the ventilation openings
as wide open as possible without causing shelter
temperatures to be intolerably cold.ENTER FROM
THIS CORNER
ADJUSTABLE CORD NOT
TIED TO STAKE, TIGHTENED
BY LAST PERSONTO CRAWL
UNDER CANOPY AND INTO
VERTICAL SHELTER ENTRY
TIE 27 in. ABOVE
• GROUND
TIE A STRING TO
,1 / TIE·POINT IN CENTER
/ OF END OF CANOPY
II
II
"
": I
V
" .'
ROPEOR CORD (OR A STRAIGHT SMOOTH
STICK 7 FEET LONG) UNDER RIDGELINE
OF CANOPY
SIDE ABOUT 7 in. ABOVE GROUND
w......" ~...,""'_ *;4j()lQ"p" ,w" 'V~,,'/_. ..~,' ( Lin''" II,.
IF IN SOFT OR SHALLOW
EARTH, SECURE THE TOPS
OF THE TWO 4·ft STAKES
WITH GUY CORDS TO
STAKES (NOT SHOWN)
TO COVER THE VERTICAL ENTRY HOLE OF A SHELTER, USE THIS CANOPY, THAT CAN
BEMADE OF THIN PLASTIC TO WITHSTAND WIND AND RAIN FOR WEEKS
FOR A 6-ft BY 6·ft CANOPY
DRIVE TWO 4-ft STAKES
ABOUT 6·'1J ft. APART
TIE CLOSE
TO GROUND
i::~~t~~"'O
; WITH STRING
Bft FINISHED ~ I
THREE TABS ON ONE END OF THE CANOPY
(MAKE OTHER END THE SAME)
CUT SMOOTH
TAB AT CORNER CURVE COMPLETED TIE·POINT
OF TIE·POINTS ARE MADE AT THE CORmRS WITHOUT FIRST MAKING TABS,
THE CANOPY WILL HAVE CUPPED·IN SIDES THAT CATCH WATER AND WIND.)
MARK AN "X"
2"14 in. IN FROM
CORNER
\,n.
DIA.ISTHISSMALL
5. WITH THE STRONG PIECE OF STRING THAT WILL BE USED TO
CONNECT A TIE·POINT TO A STAKE, TIE A PEBBLE IN THE TAB
SO THAT THE PEBBLE IS COMPLETELY COVERED AT THE "X"
MARK. SEE SKETCHES.
6. MAKE 6 TIE·POINTS IN THIS MANNER, EACH WITH A STRING
ATTACHED.
7. PITCH THE CANOPY AS ILLUSTRATED ABOVE, WITH ITS TWO
SIDES EACH ABOUT 7 INCHES ABOVE THE GROUND.
DIRECTIONS:
t. CUT A PIECE OF PLASTIC 6"1J ft. BY 6·'1J ft.. TO MAKE A 6 ft.
BY 6ft. CANOPY. USE PLASTIC AT LEAST 4 MILS THICK.
2. TO MAKE DURABLE TIE·POINTS AT THE FOUR CORNERS AND
AT THE CENTERS OF THE TWO ENDS, SMOOTHLY CUT TABS
OUT OF THE SIDES - AS INDICATED BY SKETCH OF ONE END,
ON RIGHT.
3. MARK AN "X" ON EACH TAB, AS SHOWN.
4. SELECT 6 PEBBLES OR LUMPS OF EARTH EACH ABOUT:t4 INCH
IN DIAMETER.
Fig. A. A dependable canopy to keep fallout and rain out of a vertical entry.Appendix A.I
Door-Covered Trench Shelter
(See illustration at the end of Appendix A.I)
PROTECTION PROVIDED
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor250
(PF 250)-a person in the open outside this shelter
would receive 250 times as much fallout radiation as .
he would if inside.
Against blast: Better protection than most
homes, if built in very stable earth. Blast tests have
indicated that this shelter would beundamaged up to
at least the 5-psi overpressure range from large
explosions. Without blast doors, the shelter's
occupants could be injured at this overpressure
range, although probably not fatally.
Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant from
fires producing carbon monoxide and toxic smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In a location where atleastone hollow-core
door per occupant is available, and where the
earth is very stable and a dry hole or trench 41/2
feet deep can be dug without difficulty. (A
family evacuating in a pickup truck or large
station wagon can carry enough doors, with
doorknobs removed. Strong boards at least 6
feet long and at least one full inch thick, or
plywood at least 3/4-inch thick, also can be used
to roof this 36-inch-wide trench and to support
its overhead earth shielding.)
Warning: Somedoors with single-thickness
panels if loaded with earth will break before
they bend enough to result in protective earth
arching.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
Fora typical family orothergroup withtwo
or more members able to work hard for most of
36 hours. (Stronger-than-average families with
most members able to work hard have com-
pleted this type of shelter is less than 24 hours
after receiving step-by-step, well illustrated
instructions.)
CAPACITY
The shelterillustrated isroofed with 3doorsand is
the minimum length for 3 persons. (If you have
additional doors, or boards and sticks at least 3ft long,
make the entryway trenches 3 or 4 ft longer than
illustrated-if not pressed for time.)
For each additional person, add an additional
door. (If more thanabout 7personsare to besheltered,
build two or more separate shelters.)
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
I. Before beginning work, study the drawings and
read ALL of the following instructions.
2. Divide the work; CHECK OFF EACH STEP
WHEN COMPLETED.
3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed (I) a ventilating pump (a KAP 16 in.
wide and 28 in. high), essential for this shelter
except in cool weather, and (2) the storage of at
least 15gallons ofwater per occupant(seeAppendix
Band Chapter 8).
4. Start to assemble materialsand tools that are listed
for the illustrated 3-person shelter.
A. Essential Materials and Tools for a 3-Person
Shelter
• Three hollow-core doors.
• A shovel (and a pick, ifthe earth isvery
hard).
• Two to three square yards per person of
waterproof materials for rainproofing the
roof. Use materials such as 4-mil polyeth-
ylene film, shower curtains, plastic table-
cloths, plastic mattress covers, or canvas.
• Two pieces of plastic or tightly woven
cloth (each about 61/2 X 61/2 ft) to make
canopies over the two shelter openings. Also
sticks and cords or strips of cloth to supportthe canopies-as described in Fig. A of the
introductory section of this appendix.
• Materials and tools for buildingasimple
shelter-ventilating pump, a KAP 16 in. wide
and 28 in. high. (See Appendix B.) Only in
cold or continuously breezy, cool weather
can tolerable temperaturesand humidities be
maintained in a crowded underground
shelter without an air pump.
• Containers for storing adequate water.
(See Chapter 8.)
B. Useful Materials and Tools
• Large cans, buckets, and/or pots with
bail handles-in which to carry earth and
later to store drinking water or human
wastes.
• Two pillowcases and one bedsheet per
person-to make "sandbags" around shelter
openings and to cover trench walls. (If
available, large sheets of 4-mil polyethylene
are better than bedsheets, because they keep
earth walls damp and stable. They also help
keep shelter occupants dry and clean and
prevent earth from falling into their eyes.)
• File, knife, pliers, hammer.
• Measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler.
• Expedient life-support items.
5. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP.
6. Wear gloves from the start-even tough hands
can blister and become painful and infected after
hours of digging.
7. Check to be sure the earth is stable and firm
enough so that a trench shelter with unshored
(unsupported), vertical earth walls will be safe
from cave-ins. (Interior doors are not strong
enough to roof an earth-covered trench wider
than 3 ft.)
As a test of the stability of earth, dig a small
hole about 18 in. deep. Remove all loose earth
from the bottom of the hole. Then make a
"thumb test" by pushing your bare thumb into
the undisturbed surface at the bottom of the hole.
If you can push your thumb into the earth no
farther than one inch, the earth should be
suitable for this type of shelter. If the earth does
not pass the "thumb test," move to another
location and try the test again. Continue to
relocate and repeat until suitable earth is
found, or build a shored-trench or aboveground
shelter.
8. Prepare to dig a vertical-walled trench41/2 ft deep
and 3 ft wide. To determine the length of the
trench, add together the widths ofall the doors to
be used for roofingit, then subtract8in. from the
sum. (To avoid arithmetical errors, it is best to
lay all the doors side by side on the ground.)
9. Clear any brush, grass, or weeds that are more
than a few inches high from the area where the
trench will be dug. Also clear the ground around
all sides of the trench, to a distance of about 8ft
from the sides and ends of the trench.
10. Stake out a rectangular trench 36 in. wide, with
its length as determined above. Also stake outthe
.entrance at one end, as illustrated in Fig. A.l at
the end of Appendix A.l, and the ventilation
trench and opening at the other.
II. Dig the main trench, the entryway trench, and
the ventilation trench. Place the excavated earth
along both lengthwise sides of the trench,
starting at the outside edges of the cleared space.
Besure that no earth ispiled closer than 3ftto the
sides of the trench.
12. To be sure that unstable, unsafe earth is not
encountered at depths below 18 in., repeat the
"thumb test"each time the trench isdeepened an
additionalfoot. Ifthe earthdoes not pass the test,
do not dig the trench any deeper; try another
location.
13. To keep each trench its full width as it isdug, cut
a stick 36 in. long and another 18 in. long; use
them repeatedly from the start to check the
widths ofthe main trench and the entry trenches.
Keeping the trenches full width will save much
work and time later.
14. Carefully level and smooth the ground to a
distance of 21/2 ft from the sides of the trench, so
that the doors will lie flat on the ground up to the
edges of the trench.
15. If plenty of sheets, bedspreads, plastic, and/or
other materials are available, cover the trench
walls with them. Wall coverings should stop one
inch from the floor of the trench to prevent their
being stepped on and pulled down. Plastic wall
coverings keep some types of damp earth walls
from drying out and crumbling.16. To be able to place an adequate thickness of
shielding earth all the way to and around the
entryway and ventilation hole, stack improvised
"sandbags" around these two openings before
placing the earth on the roof. Or use cloth or
plastic material to make "rolls" of earth, as
illustrated in the introductory section of Appen-
dix A.
17. Shovel earth around the rolls, sandbags, or other
means used to raise the level of the earth around
the two shelter openings. Slope this earth
outward, and pack it, so that rainwater on the
ground cannot run into the shelter.
18. To rainproof the shelter and to prevent the
roofing doors from being dampened and
weakened, use available waterproof materials as
follows:
a. If the earth is dry, the easiest and best way to
make a rainproof roof is to place the doors'
directly on the ground, with each of the end
doors overlapping an end of the main trench
by 4 or 5 in. (Be sure again to levelthe ground
surface as you place each door, so that each
lies flat against the ground all the way to the
edges of the trench.) Next, mound dry earth
over the doors. First place a few inches of
earth on the doors near their.ends; then
mound it about 12 in. deep above the
centerline of the trench. Slope the earth to
both sides so as to just cover the ends of the
doors. :\ext. smooth off the earth mound.
being careful to remove sharp stones that
might puncture rainproof materials. Then
place waterproof material over the smooth
mound. making the "buried roof" shown in
Fig. A.!. Finally, carefully mound an addi-
tional 12to 15in. of earth on top of the buried
roof. again placing it first over the doors near
their ends. The earth over the trench should
be at least 2 ft thick. so that effective earth
arching will support most of the weight of the
earth covering and will provide considerable
protection if struck by blast.
b. If the earth is wet, place the waterproof
material directly on top of the doors, to keep
them dry and strong. To make water run off
this waterproof covering and to keep water
from collecting on a horizontal surface and
leaking through, slope the doors toward one
side of the trench by first making one side of
the trench about 3 in. higher than the other
side. A way to raise one side-s-without
increasing the distance the doors must
span-is to place an earth-filled "roll" of
bedsheets or other material along one edge of
the trench. To keep the waterproof material
used to cover the doors from slidingdown the
slope of the doors when earth is shoveled on,
tuck the upper edge ofthe material under the
higher ends of the doors. Finally, mound
earth over the doors. first placing it neartheir
ends. The mound should be at least 2 ft deep
above the centerline ofthe roofand about 3or
4 in. deep over both ends of the doors.
If more waterproof material is available than
is required to make a buried roof (or to cover
the doors) and to make the illustrated
canopies over the two shelter openings, use
this excess material to cover the wet ground
on which the doors are placed.
19. Dig small drainage ditches around the completed
shelter, to lead runoff water away.
20. To keep rain and; or sand-like fallout particles
from falling into the shelter openings, build an
open-sided canopy over each opening, as
illustrated in Fig. A, shown in the introductory
sectio.n of Appendix A.
21. Install the air pump (a KAP) in the shelter
opening into which air is already naturally
moving.
22. If the shelter has a KAP, protection against
radiation can be increased by placing containers
of water and ofheavy foods, or bags of earth, so
as to partially block the openings. This would
still permit adequate air to be pumped through
the shelter, except in very hot weather.
23. For seats, place water and food containers,
bedding, etc., along the side of the trench that is
farther from the off-center entry trenches. If the
trench floor is damp, covering it with a
waterproof material, tree limbs, or brush will
help.
24. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all waterstored in expedient containers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water.
Even if only muddy water isavailable, store it. Ifyou do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible
to boil water when needed.
25. Put at least your most useful emergency
tools inside your shelter.
26. Astime and materials permit, continueto improve
your chances of surviving by doing as many of the
following things as possible:
(I) Makea homemade fallout meter, asdescribed
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the airispumped through with a
KAP.
(3) Dig a stand-up hole near the far end of the
shelter. Make the hole about 15in. indiameter
and deep enough to permit the tallest of the
shelter occupants to stand erect occasionally.
PLAN
_RDS 011STICKS
0l'£N11IG OF\/£NTlLATION
Tll£1ICH
1210.
IFTIME PERMITS AND ENOUGH
ROOFING MATERIALS FOR 18-
in,-WIDE TRENCHES ARE AVAIL-
ABLE(TWOADDITIONALDOORS,
OR BOARDS OR STICKS AT
LEAST 3 ft. LONG) MAKE BOTH
ENTRANCE TRENCH AND VEN-
TLATIoN TRENCH ABOUT 30 in.
LONGER. FOR INCREASED PRO-
TECTION
A
-,
THME 5Z... 000RS-
r--,ft'DIo
~---T---""---'
: I : IIr--+-'!'--,i--;-;''''''-:M
I
" TIll[ ANDIOATIRIALS All( AVAIL-
AIIU AfTER CDlIlI'UTIIIG THE SH£1.T£R,
MAKE THE SHI(lOtNGAItOUNO THE
ENTIIYWAY 12... HIGH£R-AS INDICATED
.. THE DASHED L1N£i!t FOIl ADDITIONAL
SAND_S.
SECTION A-A
SECTION B-B
Fig. A.1. Door-Covered Trench Shelter.Appendix A.2
Pole-Covered Trench Shelter
PROTECTION PROVIDED
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor300
(PF 300)-a person in the open outside this shelter
would receive 300.times more fallout radiation than
he would if he were inside.
Against blast: Quite good protection if built in
stable earth. Blast tests have indicated that this
shelter, if built in stable earth, would not be seriously
damaged by blast effects of large explosions at least
up to the 7-psi overpressure range. (At 7 psi, most
buildings would be demolished.) Without blast
doors, occupants of the shelter could be injured,
although probably not fatally at this overpressure.
Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant
from fires producing carbon monoxide and toxic
smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In wooded areas with small trees, for builders
who have an ax or a bow saw, crosscut or chain saw,
and digging tools. Or in an~ location where the
necessary poles may be obtained.
In stable earth, where the water table or rock is
more than 41:2 ft below the surface.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
Fora typical family orothergroup withtwo
or more members able to work hard for most of
48 hours. (Stronger-than-average families with
almostallmembers ableto workhard havecom-
pletedthis type of shelter is about24 hours after
receiving step-by-step, well illustrated instruc-
tions. before travelling to the wooded building
site and beginning to cut trees and haul poles.)
CAPACITY
The shelter illustrated is the minimum length
recommended for 4 persons. For each additional
person, add at least 23/ 4 ft to the length of the shelter
room. If more than about 10 persons are to be
sheltered, build 2 or more separate shelters.
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
I. Before beginning work, study the drawings
and read ALL of the following instructions.
Divide the work so that some people will be
digging while others are cutting and hauling
poles. CHECK OFF EACH STEP WHEN
COMPLETED.
2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed: (I) a ventilating pump, and (2) the
storage of at least 15 gallons of drinking water
per occupant (see Appendix B and Chapter 8).
3. Start to assemble materials and tools. Those
listed are for the illustrated 4-person shelter with
a room II ft long.
A. Essential Materials and Tools
• Saw (bow saw or crosscut preferred)
and/or ax for cutting poles to the lengths and
diameters illustrated.
• Shovels (one for each two workers).
• Pick (if the ground is hard).
• Rainproof roof materials (very impor-
tant in rainy, cold weather). At least 2square
yards of such material per person would be
required; 3 square yards per person would be
better. Shower curtains, plastic tablecloths,
plastic mattress covers, canvas, and the like
can be used. Also needed are 2 pieces of
plastic or tightly woven cloth, each about
61/ 2 X 61h ft, to make canopies over the two
shelter openings.
• Materials and tools for buildinga simple
shelter-ventilating pump, a KAP 22 in. wide
and 36 in. long. (See Appendix 8.) Only in
cold or continuously breezy, cool weathercan tolerable temperatures and humidities be
maintained for days in a crowded under-
ground shelter that lacks an air pump.
• Containers for storing adequate water.
(See Chapter 8.)
B. Useful Materialsand Tools
• Large cans, buckets, and/or pots with
bail handles-in which to carry earth and
later to store drinking water and human
wastes.
• Two bedsheets and two pillowcases per
person for covering cracks between roofing
logs, making "sandbags," and improvising
bedsheet-hammocks and bedsheet-chairs.
• A file.
• A measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler.
• Rope, or strong wire (100 ft)-to make
earth-retaining pole walls close to the shelter
openings (as explained in step 19) and for
hammock supports, etc.
• Chain saw, pick-mattock, hammer,
hatchet, pliers.
• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil-to keep
hand saws from sticking in gummy wood.
• Expedient life-support items recorn-
mended in this book.
• Mosquito netting or window screen to
cover the openings, if mosquitoes or fliesare
likely to be a problem.
4. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP.
5. Wear gloves from the start-even tough hands
can blister after hours of chopping and digging,
and become painful and infected.
6. Ifpossible, select a location for the shelter that is
in the open and at least 50 ft from a building or
woods. Remember that on a clear day the
thermal pulse (flash of heat rays) from a very
large nuclear explosion may cause fires as far
away as 25 miles,
7. If the site chosen is on a steep slope, locate the
shelter with its length crosswise to the direction
of the slope.
8. Stake out the outlines of the trench, driving
stakes as indicated in Fig. A.2.1 at the end of
Appendix A.2. If more than 4 persons are to be
sheltered, increase the length of the shelter room
by 2 ft 9 in. for each additional person.
9. Clear the ground of saplings and tall grass within
10 ft of the staked outlines so that later the
excavated earth can be easily shoveled back onto
the completed shelter roof.
10. Start digging, throwing the first earthabout 10ft
beyond the staked outlines of the trench. Less
able members of the family should do the easier
digging, near the surface. Those members who
can use an ax and saw should cut and haul poles.
See the introductory section of this appendix for
the know-how to make this hard work easier.
II. Pile all excavated earth at least 2 ft beyond the
edges of the trench, so roofing poles can be laid
directly on the ground. To make sure that the
. trenches are dug to the specified full widths at the
bottoms, cut and use two sticks-one 42 in. long
and the other22 in. long-to check trench widths
repeatedly.
12. At the far end of-the shelter dig the ventilation
trench-emergency exit, making it 22 in. wide and
40 in. deep. This will help provide essential
ventilation and cooling. In cold weather or when
fallout is descending, canvas or plastic curtains
should be hung in the two openings to controlthe
air flow.
13. Make and install threshold boards, to keep the
edges of earth steps and earth ledges from being
broken off. (In damp earth, it is best to install
threshold boards before roofing the shelter.) If
boards are lacking, use small poles.
14. Unless the weather is cold, build a shelter-
ventilating pump-a KAP 20 in. wide X 36 in.
high. (Ifthe weather is cold, building a KAP can
be safely delayed until after the shelter is
completed.) A KAP should be made before a
crisis, or, if possible, before leaving home.
15. Obtain fresh-cut green poles, or, as a second
choice, sound, dry, untreated poles. Useno poles
smaller in diameter than those specified in the
accompanying drawings. For ease in hauling,
select poles no more than 50% larger in diameter
than those specified.16. Lay the poles side by side over the trench.
Alternate the large and small ends to keep the
poles straight across the trench. If roof poles 9 ft
long are being used to roof a 5-ft-wide trench, be
sure to place the roof poles so that their ends
extend 2 ft farther beyond one side of the trench
than beyond the other side. This will enable
shelter occupants, after the stoop-in shelter is
completed, to widen the shelter room 2 ft on one
side. First. it can be widened to provide a 2-ft-
wide sleeping ledge. Later, it can be further
deepened to make space for additional expedient
hammocks or for double-bunk beds of poles or
boards built on each side of the shelter.
17. For ease and safety laterwhen hangingexpedient
bedsheet-hammocks and bedsheet-chairs in the
completed shelter, place loose loops around roof
poles in the approximate locations given by the
diagram on the second shelter drawing, Fig.
A.2.2. Make these loose loops of rope, or strong
wire, or 16-in-wide strips of strong cloth, such as
501;( polyester bedsheet rolled up to form a
"rope". (For making hammocks and seats, see
Chapter 14. These are not essential, although
decidedly useful.)
18. Cover the cracks between the logs with cloth,
leaves, clay, or any other material that will keep
dirt from falling down between the cracks.
CAUTION: DO NOT try to rainproof this flat
roof, and then simply cover it with earth. Water
will seep through the loose earth cover, puddle
on the flat roofing material, and leak through the
joints between pieces of roofing material or
through small holes.
19. Place 6-ft-long poles. one on top of the other.
next to the entrances. This will keep earth to be
placed on top of the entryway trenches from
falling into the openings. Secure these poles with
wire or rope. (See View A_AI in Fig. A.2.l.) If
wire or rope is not available, make earth-filled
"rolls" to hold the earth nearly vertical on the
trench roof next to each opening. (See the
introductory section of this appendix.)
20. Mound earth to a center depth of about 18 in.
over the shelter roof (as shown in View B_BI in
Fig. A.2.!) to form the surface of the future
"buried roof." Be sure to slope both sides of the
mound. Then smooth its surface and remove
sharp roots and stones that might puncture thin
rainproofing materials to be placed upon it.
21. Place the waterproofing material on the "buried
roof." If small pieces must be used, lay them in
shingle-like fashion, starting at the lower sides of
the mounded earth.
22. Cover the buried roof with another 18 in. of
mounded earth, and smooth this final earth
surface.
23. Finish the entrances by placing some shorter
poles between the two longer poles next to each
entryway. Bank and pack earth at least 6 in. deep
around the sides of the entrances, so that
rainwater on the ground cannot run into the
shelter entrances.
24. Dig surface drainage ditches around the outside
of the mounded earth and around the entrances.
25. Place a piece of water-shedding material over
each of the entrances, forming an open-ended
canopy to keep fallout and rain from the shelter
openings. (See Fig. A in the introductory section
of Appendix A.) Almost all fallout would settle
on these suspended canopies, rather than falling
into shelter openings-or would fall off their
edges and onto the ground like sand.
26. Hangthe KAP from the roofof the trench opening
into which outdoor air can be felt flowing, so that
air will be pumped in the direction of the natural
flow of air. (If you have no KAP, make and
use a small Directional Fan.)
27. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed- with available materials. If possible, disin-
fect all water stored in expedient containers, using
one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, such as
Clorox, for each 10gallons of water. Even if only
muddy water is available, store it. If you do not
have a disinfectant, it may be possibleto boil water'
when needed.
28. Put all of your emergency tools inside your
shelter.
29. As timeand materials permit, continue to improve
your chances ofsurviving by doing as many ofthe
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemade fallout meter,as described
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Makeand hangexpedient bedsheet-hammocks
and bedsheet-chairs, following the installation
diagram shown in Fig. A.2.2.
(3) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the air is pumped through with a
KAP.
(4) Dig a stand-up hole near the far end of the
shelter. Make the hole about 15in. in diameter
and deep enough to permit the tallest of the
shelter occupants to stand erect occasionally.ORNL OW6 7"-"755~
LeCZNQ:
ALU,.NA.T[ BIG IoI>I:J ~u.. I.N05
0.- POI..£STOt<!J!.pT~ ST,.....,QHT
~NTR'f T~NCH ~ ~E.4..TER: ~
~ POLES MIN.
!5ft. L.ONG, MIN.
5MAU-'~NO 01...... 3,"
8-1n MIN. 0lN.04. L...ClQ5
(OR fHI"l. HIIH£R:'iH~'GQOUNO
"$"~~) T'O K,ELp C1JT'
I:¥J"'N"'TE.ROW~O
I
I
III
,s: J
•
,.: ~ 1fl SHORT LOGS
... • NOTC:Hf.O """"'.3JD/J!-J'W\IUJ)
~ ! L 10 LONGE. LOGS
.'
~~~~
~ 4f+,-Cio,"QEEP
~ ~l..ATIONTMl!:NCM
~"OIn.OUP
T ' ~
~...,'---.....j
~~5'V'
~t.#~61n.~
t7a\7le~~
~4f+.-Oin.~
o. wOOO~ Ml!TAL ST....Ke.
PLAN FOR STAKJNG our TRENCH ON 1t)p CI' GflClU'JD
(SEE LeGEND FOR" DIFFERENT DEPTHS OF TRENCH)
(FLOOR OF ROOM TRENCH a 3 ft. -610. WIDE)
ROOfI' POLES""INI~ 7~H. LONG,. - i". MINI~ OI.u.Al!Tl!!JI'l
L,AIO"'eovr loft. P....ST e.ACM' '0 Of" 3M£l,..Tut "COM.
PLAN VIEW OF TOP OF ,ELTE.R- SHOWING PLACEMENT
OF POLES FOR ROOF(e:AArH FILL NOT SHOWN)
-esr-.
~".
RA.lNPR(X)fI 'elL#t~~"
Of' TAA PAP£R. OR P\..ASTIC
FIl.M,V'C.
I" AV/t.JL.to.eU!, PLAQ!:
~OS(6 TO 12.in. """'1%)
UN~eNO~OfIRt.')(;:lI':
PO\,.ES AS MUO$l1,.L8, OR:
LAY SrtCKS (WIT'W ~.
I .... Of~_) 5I0l!. S'r'SIDe!
JO'01lt THE Ot..1TI!:RMOST It. io"l
~""e: POLES TO REST ON.
~~~~~~
HOL...I..~lt~1ON
~~~k~~ =~SHOWING
Au.~
PI~e,to"RTI+F1L...U!D
~I~~
5HIeLOI""'O,Crv.WLW"'V
VIEW' B- B',CROSS SECTION THROUGH
IoIlDTH OF TRENCH SHELTER I,! 1I,I.,.!d,l
o t 3
FUr
VIEW A-I>!., CROSS SECTION THFO.JGH
LENGTH OF TRENCH SHELTER
Pole-Covered Trench Shelter.
(To be Built Only in Firm Ground,Such os 0 Strong,Stable Clay or Loom)
See AccompanyingOruwing
Fig. A.2.t. Pole-Covered Trench Shelter.VIH~L UW6 74'''7~6H
6in.CI/lM£T"£.Q: LQG.S.
"-WrT"H e:.Nm-IPN:J(l.OARQl.ND TIo4E.M.lO KELPRAJNWATEROUT
~'\~~ \>J "'1..
;., 1 \ '---- coao Pu\..LE.O
..,. "'-lE;HT"'NO SEClJR£.D
FINAL €.):,(;A .....ATlC)l'...
TO MAKE.ENL-'.RGE:D
OU\;OUT FOIit. WE£,($
TOMOt(r~ OFOCCu""l'fCY
LA1'''''' ,9-p,. (OA LONGER) POL.ES
?D£~~,~ERtA~.pH~~~ 6-,n. OF
"I"!ELTE.R (.J>.N ee; E.NLARGED
AFTE.R INITl~'- .Ce».'oPLE:i'1()t-,I
,
~
o
~
"'-TERN.....TE. eM:> IV-lD SMALL ~
OF POLE.S TO t¢£P THE:M STRA.IGHT"
,tC.~ TOP C# -5H~TL.~ ROOM
; 'THIN WIRE BINDING
2 t-JA1LS TOGETHER
TWO POLES AR! 7ft. L.CNG.AND,
11£.W)1N~"YWIR£."'-S
~<No~~~u.~t?'
~~~~~nU.
NAIL IN WOOD, uSE NAILS AT
WOOD \ I LEAST 3 !1!-in. LONG.
s: j"{. .'
HAMMOC~ ~OPE
LOOP OF COAT
MANGER WIRE OR/
FENCE WIRE ~
MINIMUM MODEL
~t:"";"' r';fL::jjS~~~~~'
r--W·~'~2O'~.~ro·--j
€) Hr"D
(HO
0", II
TI.'LAce; WATEO.fOOO,ETC.O. ntiS SI0::J
~~3~H~~~K.s,
"'1W:T1ClH.S
5X3,3", PER~.e4'•.-3~
FOR 3 PERSONS
suPPORT FQlNT.5 (FROfv1 ROOF POLES) FOR
EXPEDIENT BE:D5HEET- HAMM<XK.s AND
BEDSHEET-CHAIR5 IN A ~-Pe:R,SON .sHELTER
(Cl5TANCE5 DONOT NE:W TO & EXACT)
8·~
o-l:M..r
"""'-..GIO-NCLE:'£L
.mrHAWhlOCK AND CHAIR SuPPORTS:
TIC ~ LOOPS 0'" IIlOfl't. OQ.Wla.{ AAOUI'lD
"'IP" LCta #IIT'MIYAM: ~C.1O O'tIR
..........
I'AWI"' -,'-\J>'"LOOP; WAA,ClaN ,
A~'M'IIIFOftl
TYlHt IV""'"' C~D ONE PEF(SOt>. SL.E£PS ON FLOOR ON THIS SIDE
.....-
Fig. A.2.2. Pole-Covered Trench Shelter.PROTECTION PROVIDED
Appendix A.3
Small-Pole Shelter
CAPACITY
Againstfalloutradiation: Protection Factor 1000
(PF 1000), if the shelter iscovered with at least 3 ft of
earth. That is,a person in the open outside this shelter
will receive a gamma ray dose 1000times greaterthan
he will receive inside the shelter. See drawings at the
end of Appendix A.3.
Against blast: This shelter is excellent for pre-
ventingfatalities ifit isbuilt with strongexpedient blast
doors; it isstilIquitegood ifbuilt withoutthem. (These
instructionsare for fallout shelters. Theinstructionsfor
making blast doors and other essentials for adequate
blast protection are given in Appendix D. Without
blast doors, occupants are likely to suffersert-
ous injuries above 7 psi.)
Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant
from fires that produce carbon monoxide and toxic
smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In wooded areas with small trees, for builders who
have a saw (bow saw, crosscut, or chain saw) and
digging tools. Any location is suitable if the necessary
poles may be obtained there. Try to avoid roots.
For belowground, semiburied, or aboveground
construction. (However, aboveground construction
requires the excavation and movement of so much
earth that it is not practical for 2-dayconstruction by
families with only hand tools.)
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
For families or othergroups with most members
able to work hard 12 hours a day for 2 days. (Most
people do not realize how hard and long they can
work if given a strong incentive.)
The drawingsand lists ofmaterials given in these
instructions are for a 12-person shelter. For each
additional occupant beyond 12,add 1ft to the length
of the shelter room.
This shelter requires less work and materials per
occupant if its room is sized for about 24 persons,
because the entrances are the same regardless of the
length of the room. (To make the shelter room twice
as long, each ofthe horizontal, ladder-like braces on
the floor and near the ceilingofthe roomcan be made
with two poles on a side, rather than one long pole on
a side.)
If the room is sized for more than 24 people,
management and hygiene problems become more
difficult when it is occupied.
For 12people to live for manydays in this shelter
without serious hardship, the benches and bunks
must be built with the dimensions and spacingsgiven
in the illustration. Or, materials must be available for
making and suspending 12 expedient bedsheet-
hammocks that can be converted each day into 12
bedsheet-chairs.
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
1. Study both of the two drawings (Fig. A.3.1
and A.3.2 at the end of Appendix A.3) and read
all of these instructions before beginning
work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP WHEN
COMPLETED.
2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed (1) a ventilating pump (a KAP 24 in
wide and 36 in. high), essential except in cold
weather, and (2) the storage of at least 15gallons
of water per occupant.3. Start to assemble the required materials. For
building a 12-person Small-Pole Shelter, the
materials are:
• Nails, wire, and/or cord: Ten pounds of
40-penny nails plus 4 pounds of 16-penny nails
are ideal. However, 7 pounds of 16-penny nails
can serve.
• Green poles. No pole should have a
small end of less diameter than the minimum
diameter specified for its use by Figs. A.3.1 and
A.3.2. The table below lists the number and sizes
of poles needed to build a 12-person Small-Pole
Shelter.
'To be shortened to fit for crossbraces.
'Width equals the distance measured across a single layer of poles
when a sufficient number of poles are laid on the ground side by side
and touching, to cover a rectangular area.
'For supports during construction.
NOTE: The above list does not include flooring materials. to be
placed between the poles of the ladder-like braces on the earth floor.
Quantity
2
2
I
2
3
2
I
I
Tools
Ax, long-handle
Bow-saw, 28-in.
(or 2-man crosscut saw)
Pick.
Shovel, long-handle
Claw hammer
File, 10-in.
Steel tape, IO-ft
(Also useful: a 50-ft steel tape and 2 hatchets)
• Materials to build a homemade ventilat-
ing pump (a KAP 24in. wide and 36in. high-see
Appendix B) and to store at least 15 gallons of
water per occupant (see Chapter 8).
4. Desirable muscle-powered tools for building a
12-person, Small-Pole Shelter are listed below.
(Most builders have succeeded without having
this many tools. A backhoe, chain saws, and
other mechanized equipment would be helpful,
but not essential.)
5. To help drain the floor, locate the shelter so that
the original ground level at the entrance isabout
12 inches lower than the original ground level at
the far end of the shelter-unless the location is
in a' very flat area.
6. Stake out the trench for the entire shelter. Even
in very firm ground, if the illustrated 12-person
shelter is being built, make the excavation at the
surface 9 ft 8 in. wide and 18ft long (3 ft longer
than the entire length of the wooden shelter). The
sloping sides of the excavation are necessary,
even in very firm earth, to provide adequate
space for backfilling and tamping. (The trench
illustrated in Fig. A.3.1 is 6 ft 4 in. deep, to
minimize work when providing only for excellent
fallout protection. For improved blast protec-
tion, the trench should be at least 7 ft deep.)
7. Check the squareness of the staked trench outline
by making its diagonals equal.
8. Clear all brush, tall grass, and the like from the
ground, to a distance of 10 ft all around the
staked location-so that later you can easily
shovel loose earth back onto the roof.
9. Ifthe ground isunstable, excavate with sides that
are appropriately less steep.
10. When digging the trench for the shelter, use a
measuring stick 7 ft 8 in. long (the minimum
3 ft
7 ft
7ft
47 ft
8 ft
36 ft
Widthb
4
2
12
12
12
8
16
4
12
Number of
Poles Required
5 in.
5 in.
5 in.
5 in.
5 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
3', in.
3', in.
2 in.
Minimum Diameter
of Small End
• Boardsfor benches and overhead bunks,
if bedsheet-hammocks are not to be used.
(Boards are desirable, but not essential; small
poles can be used instead.) 2 X4-in. boards-70
feet for frames (or use 3-in.-diameter poles). I X
8-in. boards-I00feet (or use 1-to 2-in.-diameter
poles).
• Rainproofing materials: Preferably one
100-ft roll, 12ft wide, of 6-mil polyethylene. The
minimum amount needed is 200 sq. ft. of 4-mil
polyethylene, or 200 s9. ft of other waterproof
plastic such as tablecloths, shower curtains,
and! or vinyl floor covering. Also include 100ft
of sticks for use in drainage ditch drains e/z-in.
diameter, any lengths).
Pole Length
6 ft 2 in.
3 ft I in.
2 ft4 in."
10 ft 8 in.
8 ft 8 in.
10 ft 6 in.
7 ft 2 in.
5 ft 6 in."
6 ft 10 in.
6 ft 3 in.
2 ft 6 in."
2 ft 3 in.
5 ft 2 in.
3 ft 10 in.
10 frbottom width) to repeatedly check the excava-
tion width.
II. When digging with a shovel, pile the earth dug
from near ground levelabout lOft away from the
edges of the excavation. Earth dug from 5 or 6 ft
below ground levelthencan easily be piled on the
surface only I to 5 ft from the edge of the
excavation.
12. Finish the bottom of the excavation so that it
slopes vertically 1/2 in. per foot of length toward
the entrance, and also slopes toward the central
drain ditch. (Later, sticks covered with porous
fabric should be placed in the ditches, to serve
like a crushed-rock drain leading to a sump.)
13. While some persons are excavating, others
should be cutting green poles and hauling them
to the site. Cut poles that have tops no smaller
than the specified diameters for eachtype of pole
(not including the bark).
14. For ease in handling poles, select wall and roof
poles with top diameters no more than 50%
larger than the specified minimum diameters.
15. Sort the poles by sizeand layall poles of the same
size together, near the excavation.
16. Before the excavation IS completed, start
building the ladder-like, horizontal braces of the
shelter frame. Construct these braces on smooth
ground near the excavation. Place two straight
poles. each 10 ft 6 in. long (with small-end
diameters of 4 in.), on smooth ground, parallel
and 6 ft 2 in. apart. Hold these poles securely so
thai their outer sides are exactly 6 ft 2 in. apart,
by driving two pairs of stakes into the ground so
that they just touch the outsides of the two long
poles. Each of the four stakes should be located
about one foot from the end of a pole. To keep
the 10ft 6 in. poles from being rotated duringthe
next step. nail two boards or small poles across
them perpendicularly as temporary braces,
about 4 ft apart.
Then with an ax or hatchet, slightly flatten the
inner sides of the two poles at the spots where the
ends of the 6 cross-brace poles will be nailed.
"'ext. saw each cross-brace pole to the length
required to fit snugly into its place. Finally,
toenail each cross-brace pole in place, preferably
with two 40-penny nails in each end.
17. Place the lower, ladder-like horizontal brace of
the main room on the floor of the completed
excavation.
18. Build the frame of the main room. Near the four
corners of the room, secure four of its wall poles
in their final vertical positions by nailing, wiring,
or tying temporary brace-poles to the inner sides
of these 4 wall poles and to the inner sides of the
two long poles of the ladder-like horizontalbrace
on the bottomof the excavation. To keep the two
pairs of vertical wall poles exactly 6ft. 2in. apart
until the upper ladder-like horizontal brace is
secured in its place, nail a temporary horizontal
brace across each pairof vertical poles, about I ft
below their tops.
19. To support the upper ladder-like horizontal
brace, nail blocks to the inner sides of the four
vertical wall poles, as shown in the lower right-
hand corner of the pictorial view, Fig. A.3.2. If
you have large nails, use a blockabout 3in. thick
and 6 in. long, preferably cut from a green, 4-in.-
diameter pole.
20·. In the finished shelter, DO NOT leave any
vertical support poles under the long poles of the
upper ladder-like horizontal brace; to do so
would seriously reduce the usable space alongthe
walls for benches, bunks, and occupants.
21. While some workersare buildingthe frame of the
main room, other workers should make the four
ladder-like horizontal braces for the two en-
trances, then make the complete entrances. To
keep the ladder-like horizontal braces square
during construction and back-filling, nail a
temporary diagonal brace across each one.
22. When the four wall poles and the two ladder-like
horizontal braces of the main room are in place,
put the remaining vertical wall poles in place,
touching each other, until all walls are com-
pleted. When placing the wall poles, keep them
vertical by alternately putting a butt and a top
end uppermost. Wall poles can be held In
position by backfilling and tamping about a foot
of earth against their lower ends, or they can be
wired in position until backfilled.
23. Besure to use the two 5-in.-diameter poles (6 ft 2
in. long) by placing one next to the top and the
other next to the bottom of each of the main
doorways to the room. Study the drawings. Use
braces, each 2 ft 3 in. long, to hold apart the top
and bottom of each doorway-thus making sure
that a 24-in.-wide air pump can swing in either
doorway.
24. To prevent earth from coming through the
cracks between wall poles; cover the walls withcloth, plastic, rugs, roofing, or even cardboard. If
none of these are available, use sticks, twigs, or
grass to cover the wider cracks.
25. After all horizontal bracing and vertical wall
poles are in place, begin backfilling, puttingearth
between the walls and trench sides. Pay particu-
lar attention to the order of filling. The earth fill
behind all the walls must be brought up quite
evenly, so that the earth fill behind one side is no
more than 12 in. higher at anyone time than the
earth on the opposite side. Lightly tamp theearth
fill in 6-in. layers. A pole makes a good tamper;
do not use a mechanical tamper.
26. Next, lay the roof poles side by side, touching
each other on top ofthe wall poles. Coverat least
the larger cracks with plastic, roofing, boards, or
sticks to keep earth from falling through. If the
earth is sandy, cover the whole roof with some
material such as bedsheets or plastic to keep
sand from running through the cracks.
CAUTION: Do not try to rainproofthis flat roof
and simply cover it with earth. If you do, water
will seep straight through the loose earth cover,
puddle on the flat roofing material, and leak
through the joints between pieces of roofing
material or through small holes.
27. Mound earth over the shelter, piling it about 15
in. deep along the centerline of the roof and
sloping it toward the sides of the roof, so that the
earth is only about 2 in. deep over the ends ofthe
roof poles. (Preparatory to moundingearth onto
the roof, place gradestakes in position so you will
be able to know the locations and depths of roof
poles as you cover them.) Continue these slopes
to two side drainage ditches. Smooth this
mounded earth with a rake or stick and remove
any sticks or rocks likely to puncture the
rainproof roofing material to be laid on it.
28. Place rainproofing material on top of the
smooth, mounded earth-as shown in sections of
the drawings in Fig. A.3.l--to make a "buried
roof." Plastic film, such as 4-mil polyethylene, is
preferable. Roofing material, plastic shower
curtains and tablecloths, or canvas can also be
used. Be sure to overlap adjoining pieces.
29. Place the rest of the earth cover over the shelter,
being sure that the corners of the shelter have at
least 21/2 ft of earth over them. Mound the dirt,
smoothing its surface so that water will tend to
run off to the surface drainage ditches which
should be dug all around the edges of the
mounded earth.
30. Build the benches and overhead bunks. Ifboards
are available, use them; if not, use small, straight
poles. On each side, build a row of benches and
bunks 9 ft long, centered in the shelter. In order
to use the shelter space to the greatestadvantage,
make the heights and widths of the benches and
bunks the same as the thoroughly tested heights
(14 in. and 4 ft 5 in.) and widths (16 in. and 24 in.)
given by Fig. A.3.2. Also be sure to space their
vertical supports 3 ft apart-so two adults can sit
between each pair of vertical bunk supports.
31. Narrow the ends of the overhead bunks so that
the aisle between them is about 28 in. wide for a
distance of38 in. from each doorway. This allows
room for installation and operation of an
expedient air pump (a KAP) for prevention of
dangerous overheating in warm weather.
32. Place a canopy (open on all sides) over each
entrance, to minimize the entry of sand-like
fallout particles or rain.
33. To improve the floor, lay small poles between the
lower brace poles, so that the floor is approxi-
mately level. Or, use sticks covered with scrap
boards.
34. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all waterstored in expedientcontainers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,'
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water.
Even ifonly muddy water isavailable, store it. If
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible
to boil water when needed.
35. Put all of your emergency tools inside your
shelter.
36. Astime and materials permit, continue to improve
your chances of surviving by doing as many of the
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemade fallout meter, as described
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the air ispumped through with a
KAP.EXPEDIENT VENTILAnON AND COOLING
(Those workers who are to work only on the
shelter itself, if pushed for time, need not read this
section before beginning their work.)
Install a KAP (one that is 24 in. wide and 36 in.
high) near the top of the doorway through which you
can feel air naturally flowing into the shelter room at
that time. (If the direction of the natural air flow
changes, move the KAP to the other opening.) To
enable the KAP to efficiently pump fresh air from the
outdoors all the way through the shelter, block the
lower half of the doorway in which the KAP is
installed with a quickly removable covering, such as a
plastic-covered frame made of sticks. Be sure to
connect the KAP's pullcord only II· in. below its
hinge line. This prevents excessive arm motions
which would cause unnecessary fatigue.
If short of time or materials, make a small
Directional Fan.
In windy or cold weather, control the natural
flow of air through the shelter by hanging adjustable
curtains in the doorways at both ends, and/or by
making and using trapdoors on the tops of the
verticalentryways. For adjustable curtains, use
pieces of plastic, each with a supporting stick
attached to its upper edge. This allows for different-
sized openings in the doorways: (1)an opening under
the lower edge of the adjustable curtain at the air-
intake end of the room, and (2) an opening over the
top of the curtain at the air-exhaust end of the room.
In cold weather, this arrangement usually will
provide adequate chimney-type ventilation for the
shelter without using an air pump.c
.-J
CAUTION:
ALL DIAMETERS GIVEN FOR POLES
ARE FOR THE SMALL END OF THE
POLE AND ARE THE MINIMUM SIZE
THAT SHOULD BE USED.
4·in, 01..... X6ft·3in.
~
4·t/1 ClAM POLES. EACH
6ft-tO,n LONG. ABOVE
AND BELOW DOORWAY
(CANOPY NOT SHOWN)
ENO WALL POLES l8ELOW ANDABOVE OOQftWA'T)
4~ln. ClAM XSft·tOift
STOOP-IN ENTRY3~ -in, OIAM X 31!- lOin, LONGPOLES
FINISH FILL LINE
,- I I I ""-""-...L.. 2 fI • I .." I _.. I -,. ~".•
au-a:«. WIDE-TOP OF
4 -,n, OIAM X 6" 3,n LONG • GROUND EXCAVATION LINE
LONGITUDINAL POLE rA /.
4 -m. DI:~inW:~~::LLEE. ~;1-2" L~- rORAINA~E O~
Lo
TOP PLAN
(EARTH COVER AND ROOF POLES REMOVED)
61
1 - '
"Hi. 22,~,"I22I' - I
-~t~~ ---- ~
tou-se. -1--+
L.A
USE to II-e!n POLES. SO
EARTH CAN BE PILED HIGH
AROUNO'NT~
~
SUMP TO B'
COVEREDWITH
BOARDS---------------
LADDER RUNGS
SPACED18in
ON CENTERS
PLAN VIEW or:
ENTRy WAY BRACES
(LOWERMOSTBRACE
NOT SHOWN IN
SECTION0-0
RA!N PROOFING -BURIED SLOPING
ROOf OF TAR PAPER, PLASTIC FILM,
OR CANVAS. ETC
4-ln, OIAM CROSSBRACE
4-in. OIAM X 7ft- 2in, LONG
IMPORTANT
LEAVE THIS 4-ln, SPACE BETWEEN
UPPER SlOE OF BRACES AND TOP
OF SIDE WALL POLES - SO IF THE
ROOFPOLES ARE BENT DOWNWARD
THEY WILL NOT PUSH CROSS-
BRACESOUT OF POSITION.
~
4-in. OIAM BRACE
VERTICAL SECTION D-D
_9ft-8jn WIDTH OF EXCAVATION
ON ORIGINAL GROUND LINE
VERTICAL SECTION A-A
(FOR IMPORTANT DIMENSIONS OF BENCHES
AND OVERHEAD BUNKS. SEE ACCOMPANYING
PICTORIAL DRAWING)
ENTRANCE
4t,lz-in ClAM XtOfl-8in
LONGP<X...ES ON SIDES
(1F ENTRY WAY-~
STIO(S LAID IN 3in DEEPx 5,n ~'''''''''''''~I''V/''''''"'' ''''I
WIOE,BURt..AP-COVEREO ---
DRAINAGEDITCH~ -~-TRENCH --------j
7ft-8,n, MIN, ACROSS BOt.
1",111,111,1,,',1
2
FEET
VERTICAL SECTION C-C
Fig. A.3.t. Plan and Elevation of Small-Pole Shelter.:b~pS~~~ ~~~. ~:~19ft a.il'!. LONG
Of'NL"OWO 71-34at R]
I
'0-
SfE DETAIL BELOW
OF CROSSBRACE
PLACEMENT
FLOOft Of' STOOP-IN HORIZONT"'L
Ift-'II'I. ENTRY IS 2ft·0w.. HIGHER
TH"'N FLOOR OF MAIN ftOO"
-- LOWERMOST 4 itI. D...... X6 ft·IO",
END WALL POlES ARE NOT PAAT
OF FR...M!
4-in. 01......
COMPLETED STooP~IN
ENTIJtY (£)(aPT FOR
BLAST l)()Oft AND CANOPy)
TO .TTACH • LONG'TUO'NAL
POL' TOENOS 0. BRACE POLU.
FL"'TTEN AS SHOWN WH£RE 8RACE
II"T5 LONG'TUOINAL POLE
(DO NOT NOTCH) 'lift. LONG 2X4
(OR AX-+EWN BLOCK)
'LL WALL FRAME POLU
ARE 4-ift. OIA.. X 7ft t·1ft.LONG
ALL 80TTOM CROSS8RACES
AM: 44ft. OIAM
FRAME POLES SHOWN SHADED
ROOF POLES AM
4-in.0IAM X 7ft 2 ~ift,
LONG
TWO HORIZONTAL 5-1n. 01.......ft- t;n. LONG
POLES(ONE TOP"''10 IOTTOM) AG""NST WHteH
THE VERTIC"'L "OLES "'T THIS END OF .....IN
ROOM WILL PRESS, AS WILL THE OOOftWAY
vERTICAL POLEI.
STOftAG£ SPACE Of\! EACH
510£ OF DOOftWA¥
PLAN VIEW OF BUNKS
DEEP SU""
,.c,4t" Ht-------~~-----
.,,,,~ Hi-----•tt i: .[Ii
<>'"",0"'"..T
21~
--l.
2 X4·"'. SU"PORTS
PfltEFERRED.BUT '~-in.
DIAM POLE ..AY IE
USED.
END VIEW OF MAIN ROOM
SHOWING PLACEMENT OF BENCHES
'.0 BOARO BUNKS - '.011 TH' ••••
END OF MAIN ROOMTHE 2X4~irl. BuNK
SUPPORTSAR£ SPACED 'ft~OIft. APART,
(BUNKS CAN BE MADE OF SMALL POLESI
HORIZONTAL END WALL POLES
ARE 'I;,-irl. DIAM X 3ft 10-.. LONe
AHD AlItE: PLACEO ON OUTSIDE Of'
10ft lift, CORNElIt POLES.
MAKE THREE ENTRANCE!!IRAtES
AS SHOWN AND F"'STEN'INSIDE
THE FOUR 10ft 8il'!. VERTIC"'l
ENTR...NCE POLES TO THE
OI.. ENSION SHOWH.
FRAME OF ENTRYWAY
4~ift. OIAM LONGITUDINAL
POLE FL"'TTENED FOR 8RACE POLE
1.1,1",1,1,1",1
2
FEET
DETAIL OF UPPER
CROSSBRACE PLACEMENT
Fig. A.3.2. Pictorial Viewof Small-Pole Shelter.Appendix A.4
Aboveground, Door-Covered Shelter
PROTECTION PROVIDED
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor
about 200 (PF 200) ifcovered with 30 in. of earth. (A
person in the open outside this shelter would receive
about 200times more fallout radiation than ifhe were
inside.) The drawing at the end of Appendix A.4
shows the earth cover only 20 in. thick, resulting in a
PF of about 100.
Against blast: Better protection than most
homes. Blast tests have indicated that this shelter
would be undamaged at least up to the 5-psi
overpressure range from large explosions. Without
blast doors the shelter'soccupants could be injured at
this overpressure range, although probably not
fatally.
Against fire: Fair, if the cloth in the entries is
covered with mud and if the shelter is sufficiently
distant from fires producing carbon monoxide and
toxic smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In a location where at leastone hollow-core
door per occupant is available, where a dry
trench at least 14inchesdeepcan bedug without
difficulty, butthe watertableorrock istooclose
to the surface for a covered-trench shelter to be
practical. (A family evacuating in a pickup
truck or large station wagon can carry enough
doors, with doorknobs removed. Strong boards
at least 6 feet long and at least one full inch
thick, or plywood at least3/4-inch thick, also can
be used to roof this shelter and to support its
overhead earth shielding.
Warning: Somedoors with single-thickness
panels if loaded with earth will break before
they bend enough to result in protective earth
arching.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
For a typical family orothergroup withtwo
or more members able to work hard for most of
36 hours. Very littlebuildingskill isneeded. (An
urban family of six, with 14- and 12-year-old
sons and 13- and 9-year-old daughters, com-
pleted this shelter, sized for six persons, in one
longworkingday: 13hours and43 minutes after
receiving the step-by-step, will illustrated in-
structions at their Florida home 10 miles from
the rural building site. This family used its
pickup truck to carry them, the interior doors,
and other survival items.)
CAPACITY
The shelter illustrated in Fig. A.4 is the
minimum length for 4 persons. It is roofed with 6
doors.
For each additional person, add another door.
(If more than about 7 persons are to be sheltered,
build 2 or more separate shelters.)
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
1. Before beginning work, study the drawing and
read ALL of the following instructions. Divide the
work so that some will be digging while others are
building an air pump, storing water, etc. CHECK
OFF EACH STEP WHEN COMPLETED.
2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed a ventilating pump (a 16-in.-wide by 24-
in.-high KAP-essential except in cold weather) and
the storage of 15gallons of water per occupant. (See
Appendix B and Chapter 8.)
3. Start to assemble the materials and tools needed.
For the illustrated 4-person shelter, these are:
A. Essential Materials and Tools
• Six doors. Boards or plywood at least 5/8_
in. thick can be used to replace one or more of
the doors.
• At least 4 double-bed sheets for each of
the first four persons, and 3 double-bed
sheets for each additional person to be
sheltered-or enough pieces of fabric and/or
of plastic to cover at least as large an area as
the sheets would cover. (This material is for
making aboveground shelter walls, to serve
as sand bags.)
• Rainproofing materials (plastic film,
shower curtains, plastic tablecloths, mattress
protectors,etc.)-I5square yards for the first
4 persons and 21/2 square yards for each
additional person.• A shovel (one shovel for each two
workers isdesirable). Apick or mattock ifthe
ground is very hard.
• A knife (the only essential tool for
making a small shelter-ventilating KAP) and
materials for a KAP 16 in. wide and 24 in.
high. (See Appendix 8.)
• Containers for storing water. (See
Chapter 8.)
B. UsefulMaterials andTools
• Two or more buckets, large cans and/or
large pots with bail handles-s-to carry earth,
and later to store water or wastes.
• Saw (or ax or hatchet)-to cut a few
boards or small poles.
• Hammer and at least 15 small nails (at
least ih in. long).
• Tape measure, yardstick,or ruler.
• Additional cloth and/or plastic-equiv-
alent in size to 2 more double-bed sheets for
each person.
• Additional waterproof material-2
more square yards per person.
• Pillowcases, or cloth or plastic bags-to
serve as earth-filled sand bags. The more, the
better.
4. To save time and work, sharpen all tools and
keep them sharp.
5. Wear gloves from the start, to help prevent.
blisters and infections.
6. Select a building site where there is little or no
chance of the ground being covered with water,
and where the water table (groundwater level) is
not likely to rise closer than 18 inches to the
surface.
7. To avoid the extra work of diggingamong roots,
select a site away from trees, if practical.
8. To lessen the dangers of fire and smoke from
nearby houses or trees that might catch fire,
locate your shelter as far as is practical from
houses and flammable vegetation.
9. Before staking out your shelter, provide one door
per person to roof the main room plus one
additional door for each of the two entries. Be
sure the door knobs have been removed. Use the
two widest doors to roof the entries.
10. To be sure that all the walls will be in the proper
positions to be roofed with the available doors,
lay all the doors on the ground, touching each
other and in the same relative positions they will
have when used to roofthe shelter. When all the
roof doors are on the ground, side by side,
determine the exact length of the shelter room.
(Note that Fig. A.4 illustrates a shelter sized for
only 4 persons.)
11. Stake out the shelter.
12. Make the earth-filled "rolls" that will form the
aboveground walls of your shelter. To make
walls out' of the rolls:
(I) Use doors as vertical forms to hold the
earth-filled rolls in place until the walls are
completed. (These are the same doors that
you will use later to roof the shelter.)
(2) Brace the door-forms with 36-in.-Iong
braces (boards or sticks) that press against
the doors, as shown in Fig. AA. Nail only
the upper braces, using only very small
nails.
(3) After the forms for the two inner sides of the
shelter have been finished, put parts of the
long sides of bedsheets on the ground, as
illustrated. (Or use other equally wide,
strong cloth or plastic material.) About a 2-
ft width of cloth should be on the ground,
and the rest of each sheet should be folded
up out of the way, over the outsides of the
door-forms. Adjacent sheetsshould overlap
about 1ft when making a roll than islonger
than one sheet.
(4) Shovel earth onto the parts of the sheet on
the ground to the height of the rolls you are
making, as shown. Note that the roll to be
made on one side is2in. higherthan the roll
on the other side.
(5) Shape the surface of the shoveled-on earth
as illustrated, to hold the "hooks" of cloth
to be formed when the exposed sides of the
sheets are folded down.
(6) Fold down the upper side of each sheet
while pulling on it to keep it tight and
without wrinkles. It should lie on theprepared earth surface, including the small
narrow trench, as illustrated in the first
section of this appendix.
(7) Pack earth onto the partofthe folded-down
sheet that is in the narrow, shallow trench.
Then, as shown in the sketches at the
bottom of the accompanying drawing, fold
back the loose edge over this small amount
of packed earth to form a "hook." (The
hook keeps the weight of the earth inside a
roll from pulling the cloth out of its proper
position.)
(8) Make a roll first on one side of the shelter,
then on the other, to keep the heights of the
earth on both sides of the shelter about
equal. This will keep the unequal heights of
earth from pushing the door-forms out of
their vertical positions.
(9) Add additional earth on top of the rolls so
that the height ofthe level earthsurface, out
to the full width of a roll, isthe same as the
height of the cloth-covered part of the roll
that is against the door-form.
(10) When the roll walls have been raised to their
planned heights on both sides ofthe shelter,
remove the braces and the door-
forms-being careful to keep the brace nails
from damaging the doors.
(II) The door-forms of the side-walls of the
shelter can be removed before building the
end-walls.
13. When smoothing the earth surfaces of the final
tops of the roll walls on both sides, check to see
that they have the sameslopeas the lowersides of
the roof doors will have after they are placed on
the roll walls. (A slope is necessary so that
rainwater reaching the waterproofcovering to be
placed over the doors will run offthe lower side.)
Study Fig. AA.
14. After the side-walls have been completed (except
for their ends that form the sides ofan entry) and
after the door-forms have been removed, use the
samedoors for forms to build the two 22-in.-wide
entries.
15. Useearth-filled "sand bags"(made ofpillowcases
or sacks, and/or the tucked-in ends of earth-
filled rolls) to make the outer ends of each
entryway.
16. Make the two doorway frames if lumber, nails,
and a saw areavailable. Makeeach frame as high
as the wall on each side of it, and slope the top
board of each frame so that it will press flat
against the doorto be supported. (Ifmaterialsfor
a frame are lacking, place a single 2 by 4-in.
board-or a poleabout 6ft.long-across the top
of the entry, in the position shown in Fig. AAfor
the top of the doorway frame.)
17. After carefully removing all the temporary
braces from the door-forms and the doors
themselves, improve the slopes of the tops of all
supporting walls so that the doors will be
supported evenlyand, without beingtwisted, will
make contact with the smooth, sloping earth or
cloth.upon which they will rest.
18. If more than enough waterproof plastic or
similar material is available to cover all the roof
doors, also cover the tops of the walls on which
the roof doors will rest. This will keep the doors
from absorbing water from damp earth.
19. Dig the illustrated 14-in.-deep, 36-in.-wide
trench inside the shelter. (Ifthe water table istoo
high to dig down 14 in., in some locations the
walls can be raised to a height of 38in. by cutting
turf sods and laying them on top of the walls.
Another way the wall height can be increased is
by making additional rolls.)
20. Place the roof doors in their final positions, and
cover them with waterproof material (if avail-
able). Be sure the waterproof material is folded
under the higher edges ofthe doors-to keep the
material from slipping downward on the sloping
doors as earth is shoveled onto the roof.
21. Extend the waterproof material on top of the
doors a couple of feet beyond the lower ends of
the doors-if enough material is available to
cover all of the roof doors.
22. When shoveling the first layer of earth onto the
rainproof material protecting the doors, avoid
hitting and possibly puncturing it with rocks or
sharp pointed roots in the earth.
23. To make earth arching more effective m
supporting most of the earth to be placed on the
roof doors, first mound earth on and near the
ends of the doors.
24. Cover the roof with at least 20 in. ofearth. Make
sure that there also is a thickness of at least 20 in.
of earth at the corners of both the room and
entries.25. To prevent surface water from running into the
shelter if it rains hard, mound packed earth
about 5 in. high just inside the two entries. Rain
can be kept out by a small canopy or awningthat
extends 2 or 3 ft in front ofthe outermostedge of
a doorway that roofs an entry.
26. If any waterproof material remains, use it to
cover the floor of the shelter.
27. If the weather iswarm or hot, install a 16-in.-wide
by24-in.-high air pump(a KAP). Attach its hinges
to the board across the roofofthe entry into which
outside air is moving naturally at the time. (If
shortof time ormaterials for a KAP, make a
small Directional Fan.)
28. Cover all exposed combustible material with
mud, earth, or otherfireproofmaterial, to reduce
the chance of exposed cloth being ignited from a
nuclear explosion or heat from a nearby fire.
29. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all water stored inexpedientcontainers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,
such as Clorox, for each IO gallons of water.
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible
to boil water when needed.
30. Put at least your most useful emergency
tools inside your shelter.
31. Astime and materials permit,continueto improve
your chances of surviving by doing as many of the
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemadefallout meter,as described
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Instail screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the air ispumped through with a
KAP.TOP BRACe tvse
ONLY veRY'
SMALL NAIL.~
ANt:. ONLY ON
TOP BRACl!.5)
os eser- I!:ACH sloe
OF ooo«-I"'OJ:;lM W'ALL~
Aeovr zz .... TO ALLOw
!"OR DOORwAY FRAMES
"~DBAG5"
CAN ee Pl..ACED
\
- - j...lI!Re..10 IMP~vs.
SHIELDING OF
,/ - ..., t!NTfIt:'(wA,Y
I '
',_.--<,)
- ;~~~~l!~C:e:olft-O,,, - ~O:-COo 5LCl='I! __ ~-~ _ I
LwrTH_Z:5.~~~:::::>.." C FINALHOR.IZaNTA.~----- -e 8 HIGH HOD ' " ~ -SURFA<'E
. seo
P
, .. • MO""'''''-O<c
U
.
o
OLL "OF THeo
AR
'y EAR
-.
ASOUT
ABOUT3f+-3", - ZI+.~O,,,
01" 5HeET
'~:i:~~C;;~~~ili~~T~
• ENTRY" FP.A/'YlE
il(OR,TO suPPORT
~(X)OA,USEA2·4,...
:!I~~I~e:
II:TOPS~iHe: ROu....s
:1115LJ~ING IT)
II! }
;/l~~~~2~N~O~E
..-r.--OUG AFTER THE
III .......LLSARE
II' COMF'Ll!!TED)
\n ~It.L _SIDE ""ALL. OF
I~ ,,~~~~,-FIl.LED
."."
:.:::::=::::.:::::----.:=::.=::.:-:-::---..:::.=:::::---t;~::~=k-:;~)
s
-~
OUT~R E.DGE. OF MOUNDED EARTH
P...AN L..OOKING ()()INN ON ....N ~E.-GROUNO
OOO~ClJvE.Rt.D ~E.LTE.R.~FOR4 PER50NS(PROVIDE. ONE AODITION-"L ROOF DOOR FOR e.ACH
PeRSON e&;:'Y'QNO4) •
ZH.~O ....., ~
ENTRy WALL50f'Y
EARTH- FILL-eO
!=:lOLLS
SMOOTH 5URFACE
FOR ()QOR.
coveeeo 1=1;001=.
FI"JAL 5uRFAC!!.·
OJ: MOUNDED
EARTH
e>ROUNO UN.
-BEt) 5HEe;T
TOP OF BOTTOM
BRACE AT "'"LOOI'<
LEVEL c» 'THE
E",rRY
BOTTOM 9RACE
2 ,~ • 4 .... BC\4.RDS
ARE PREt=ERRED
5,:)E SuPPORT OF
ENTRY DOORWAY
DOOR~FORM wALL
F'GUR!: .4.
ADDITIONAL EARTH ADDEO
ON ROL.LS TO "'ROOUCE
III'" I ~A;O~MO~~~I~NE~=;~::ILLeo
,~..ROLL5,
~~OiJ~~;f~
..,IIOtff'.{
"lrJ 61"
eARTH-
""LLl!!C ROU..~
eeo SHI!.I!.TS (OR
OTHeR EQUALLY :,TRONG
I>J',..C l!:Qj.)ALLY w.ce
CLOTH ')R PLA-::'TIC)
f'rAL5 .../
ENTRY' ....,AL.L~ OF
___----c0U'I'"ER EDGE" OF MOUNDED EARTH EARrI-i-FILL£.O ~j
"EW GF ENTRY DOORWAY-CRAMe: '" AN ~ ~ ~ABOVE.-GRCJVND COOR-COVE.RE.,O ,5HE.LT'-R I
{MA,r<.E.I'>ND INSTALL AFTER r: DOORS OF C>COR-CovERED ROCJF NTRYENTRY IS o:tv'IPL-E.TE.,p ~ ...-~_ ... -,...0;. j U
oe
~~~E[;~;;''L.~~I --{.:_o=-T-===------------------i it:~l\
~g;;~Z~"'(~~ :ii f~~-~~- _~L~_~ -~-~<;.~-~~ ~l!.--~= =f~:J.=:- ~1 <l
~~~~AT~i"'( ~ i 0 0 0 cia £I~o 0 II
ARE COMPLETeD) :~" I ; ' .. Q ..l ~III ~ I <')~ ~~ :1
Iii I: 0 rr -:';:;~r:-"-':::: =~..:-"J=_-_-__-_~-J~~-= -~~;>~.==~ :;::;:~-:.:~r
JJi r*4i"-~ ~ a a a a hII:'I,'"'II
"I1\\"
C,",T~OUT SECTI()J-.j ,
rc 5-HOW ,NSIOI! OF
E.ARTH~ROLL~
f'o.IOTE;IF TRENCHING IS IMPRACTICAL,
HI!IGHTE.N W"AL".:5TO ~'" OYpurriNG ON AODlnoNAL "R::)LLS;'
OR sq.LJ"V~~S QF:- 500 (TuRF).
Is.,
'"
-~Al.l.~IL-
-[X)()"'-FORM WALL
~H-O,,,
'A'
s2 ROOMW'IDT~- ABOuT 3H-.;l,,,
BFiACe:
~~~_~6()N~.~b'tiktg~~~LT~
f.AATH-FILLl!:O R.OLL~
TOP e"lACl"!:'S (oo.a..P'tD~
POLl!!.~) ~ f I - 0 .... LONG
cccc-ec AT l!ACH
coRNeR AND NeAR
THe. Cl!NT"e.fIIt OF
EACH DOOR
v.evv 01:" AN AWJVE.-GROUND DOQR-COvl!..RE.D
~HE...L""'E..R SHOWING E.AATH-FILLE.D ~L.,s
AND DC.>C:I=l:-f:"ORM'NAL~ CFTHE. ~
BED SHEET (OR OT~ER
EQuALLY STRONG AND EQUALLY
\.VIDE CLOTH OR PLASTIC)
,- -oooa- FORM 'WALL
fARTH
''"FIGURE'
ToP BRACe.
(31+-0 .... LONG)
TRENCH 15 DUG
AFTER Tl-iE WALL~
ARE COM"'LETEC
~E[XX:lR'5USl!O
~ ~ THAT w'ERE..FIRST useD J:'Ol'l: _
n;,.MF'ORA.AY FORM
WALLSTO~'RoLLS
EARTH J
6AAC~
~)'X(J)>:&yW/~/?" ~'Dv,'}(O»)XG;;;;KV77:KY:?> ~~<O,»(O'):t<;;7XV77;('i>., ~}~v>"<e7Yx:;;;x,yJJX,'»)Jx
GRQUN[; LINE
l!DG~OIF
el!05Hl!ETS--...."
,",aRMING \
E,e..RTH-l::Iw..EO"HOOIo(S"
DI~.sH()WINGsrE.P~ TO MAIo<E. E.ART~-~ILLI!.D
ROLLS F'ORN-J .A6Oo/E·GRO\..ND OCX)A·~iAl:£O ~f.L.TIJ\
Fig. A.A. Aboveground, Door-Covered Shelter.Appendix A.5
Aboveground, Ridgepole Shelter
PROTECTION PROVIDED
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor300
(PF 300) if covered with 24 in. of earth. (A person in
the open outside this shelter would receive about 300
times more fallout radiation than if he were inside.)
See the accompanying drawing at the end of
Appendix A.5.
Against blast: Better protection than most
homes. Blast tests have indicated that this shelter
would be undamaged at least ul? to the S-Qsi
overpressure range from large explosions. Without
blast doors, the shelter's occupants could be injured
at this overpressure range, although probably not
fatally.
Against fire: Good, if the shelter is sufficiently
distant from fires producing carbon monoxide and
toxic smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In many wooded areas and wherever enough
poles are available.
In locations where belowgrourid expedient
shelters are impractical because the water table or
rock is too close to the surface for a covered-trench
shelter.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
For a family or other group with five or
more members able to work hard for most of48
hours, with at leastone member able to saw and
fit poles and use the hand tools listed on the
following page. (A group of rural Florida fami-
lies. with 12 of the 15 members able to work,
completed a shelter like this 23 hours and 40
minutes after receiving the step-by-step, well
illustratedinstructions 12milesfromthe wooded
building site. They used only muscle-powered
tools, and movedover50 tonsofsandy shielding
earth.)
CAPACITY
The shelter illustrated in Fig. A.5 is the
minimum length for 5 persons. For each additional
person, add I ft to the length of the ridgepole and
shelter room. (If more than about 15persons are to be
~\\~\\~\~~,\it~2. \)\ \l\\)\'C ~'C't>'d"t'd\~ Th~\m,)
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
I. Before beginning work, study Fig. A.5 and read
ALL of the following instructions.
2. Divide the work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP
WHEN COMPLETED.
3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed a ventilating pump (a KAP 20in. wide
and 26 in high, essential for this shelter except in
cool weather) and the storage of at least 15
gallons of water per occupant. (See Appendix B
and Chapter 8.)
4. Start to assemble the materials. For the illus-
trated 5-person shelter, these are:
A. Essential Materials and Tools
• Poles. (Fresh-cut, green poles are best;
sound, untreated poles are satisfactory.) See
the following list for the number of poles
required for a 5-person shelter.Use
For main room:
Ridgepole
Column-posts
Footing log
Cross braces
Roof poles
Vertical end-wall poles
Slanting end-wall poles
and extras
Pole Length
4 ft 9 in.
4 ft 3 in.
8 ft 0 in.
6 ft 2 in.
9 ft 0 in.
5 ft 0 in.'
6 ft 6 in.'
Minimum
Diameter of
Small End
6 in.
5 in.
6 in.
3 in.
4 in.
3'h in.
3'h in.
Number
of Poles
Required
I
2
I
2
Width When All
Are Laid on
the Ground
5 ft
U
14 fth
18 fth
For outer sections of entryways:
Horizontal. poles
Cross braces (material for 16)
Wall poles
Roof poles
For inner sections of entryways:
Long, sloping poles
Cross braces
Vertical support poles
Roof poles
8 ft 0 in.
5 ft 0 in.'
3 ft 4 in.
2 ft 8 in.
14 ft 0 in.
I ft 8 in.'
4 ft Oin.'
3 ft 0 in.
3'h in.
3'h in.
3 in.
2'/2 in..
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
2'h in.
4
6
32 fth
12fth
4
8
8
13 fth
"This width equals the distance measured across the tops of a single layer of poles when a sufficient number of polesare laid on
the ground side by side with all/he same ends in a straight line and touching. (These poles will be placed butt-ends down to form
the walls of the shelter room.) .
hThis width equals the dist~nce measured across a single layer of poles when a sufficient number of poles are laid on the
ground side by side and touching, with large ends and small ends alternating so as 10 cover a rectangular area.
'To be cut into the various lengths needed to close the ends of the main,room and also to close a part of each entryway.
• A saw and an ax or hatchet, to cutgreen
poles, (A bow saw or crosscutsaw serves well
and often is more dependable than a chain
saw. Having an extra blade for a bow saw
may be essential.)
• Two shovels (one shovel for each two
workers is desirable). A pick will also be
needed, if the earth is hard.
• Large buckets, cans, or pots with bail
handles-in which to carry earth, and laterto
store water or wastes.
• A knife.
• A hammer and at least 80 nails (3 in. or
longer). If these are not at hand, rope, wire,
or strips of cloth can be used to lash poles
together. At least 200 ft. of rope or strong
wire will be needed, or two additional
bedsheets for each person to be sheltered.
(Other fabric of equal strength can be used.)
The cloth can be cut or. torn into foot-wide
strips and twisted slightly to make "rope."
• Three double-bed sheets for the illus-
trated 5-person shelter or a piece of strong
fabric or plastic of about the same size. One
additional sheet for each additional 2
occupants. (If sufficient sheets or other
material are not available, use many sticks
and small poles, placed across the 9-ft side
poles.)
• At least 2 square yards per person of
rainproofing material (shower curtains,
plastic tablecloths, plasticmattresscovers, or
the like)-essential in rainy, cold weather.
• Materials for building a ventilating
pump, a KAP 20 in. wide and 26 in. high.
(See Appendix B.)
• Containers for storing 15 gallons of
water per occupant. (See Chapter 8.)
B. Useful Tools and Materials
• Additional saws, axes, hatchets, shovels,
and large buckets or cans.• A chain saw-if there is a person in the
group who is skilled at operating one.
• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil-to keep a
handsaw from sticking in green, gummy
wood.
• A measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler.
• One bedsheet for each person to be
sheltered, or a piece ofstrongfabric or plastic
of about the same size.
• A total of 40 square yards of rainproof-
ing materials for the illustrated 5-person
shelter and 31'2 square yards for each
additional person. (Even thin plastic will
serve for the "buried roof.")
5. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP.
6. Wear gloves from the start-even tough hands
can blister after hours of digging and chopping
and can become painful and infected.
7. Select a shelter location where there is little
chance of the ground being covered with waterif
it rains hard. (Ifyou are sure the water table will
not rise to cover the floor of a shallow
excavation, you can save work by first lowering
the area of the planned main room by a foot or
two. After the shelter is roofed, the excavated
earth can be shoveled back to help cover the
completed pole roof.) To avoid the extra work of
cutting roots when excavatingearth, select a site
at least as far away from a tree as the tree istall.
8. For ashelter that is completely aboveground,
clear grass. weeds, etc. from the area where the
shelter is to be built. (This reduces the possible
problem of chiggers, ticks, etc.) Do not remove
any earth at this stage.
9. Stake out the entire shelter. Check the square-
ness of the shelter room by making its diagonals
equal. Then drive two lines of stakes to mark the
outside edges of the completed earth covering.
Place these stakes 4ft outside the future positions
of the lower ends of the roof poles.
10. Check the squareness of the future floor area
inside the two lines marking where the
two V-shaped, 4-in.-deep trenches will be dug,
to secure the lower ends of the sloping side-poles
of the room. These two parallel lines are 14ft 6
in. apart. When the two diagonals joining the
ends of these two parallel lines are equal in
length, the area between them has square
corners.
II. While some persons are staking out the shelters,
others should be cutting green poles and hauling
them to the site. Cut poles that have tops with
diameters (excluding bark) no smaller than the
diameters specified on the illustration for each
type of pole.
12. To make the hauling and handling of the longer
poles easier, select poles with top diameters no
more than 50% larger than the specified
minimum diameters.
13. Sort the poles by length and diameter and lay all
poles of each size together, near the excavation.
14. AS SOON AS POLES ARE BROUGHT TO
THE SITE, SOME WORKERS SHOULD
.START BUILDING THE FOUR LADDER-
LIKE HORIZONTAL BRACES FOR THE
ENTRYWAYS-TO AVOID DELAYS LAT-
ER. Study the drawing. Then construct these
braces on smooth ground near the excavation.
Place two straight poles, each 8 ft long (with
small-end diameters of 31/2 in.), on smooth
ground, paralleland so that theiroutersides are 3
ft apart. Hold these poles securely so that their
outer sides are exactly 3 ft apart, by driving two
pairs of stakes into the ground so that they just
touch the outsides of the two long poles. Each of
the four stakes should be located about one foot
from the end of a pole. To keep the 8-ft poles
from being rotated duringthe next step, nail two
boards or small poles across them perpen-
dicularly, as temporary braces, about 4 ft apart.
Then with an ax or hatchet, slightly flatten
the inner sides of the two poles at the spots where
the ends of the 4 cross-brace poles will be nailed.
Next, saw each cross-brace pole to the length
required to fit snugly into its place. Finally,
toenail each cross-brace pole in place, preferably
with two large nails in each end.
15. If more than 5 persons are to be sheltered, use 3
column-posts for 6 to 9 persons, and 4 column-
posts for 10 to 14 persons.
16. For each additional person beyond 5, make the
ridgepole and the footing log each I foot longer
than shown in Fig. A.5.17. After notching the footing log (see drawing),
place it in a trench dug deep enough so that the
bottoms of its notches are about 4 inches below
the surface of the ground.
18. Carefully dig the 4-in.-deep, V-shaped, straight
trenches in which the lower ends of the 9-ft wall
poles will rest. Dig each of these two parallel
trenches 7 ft. 3 in. from the center line of the
footing log.
19. Carefully notch a "V" only about l/rin. deep in
the top of each of the two outer column-posts.
Then saw off the other ends so that each is 4 ft.
3 in. long. (When they are placed on the notched
footing log and the ridgepole is placed on them,
the upper side of the ridgepole will be about 4 ft
4 in. above the ground.)
20. Place the two outer column-posts in their
notches in the footing log, and secure the base of
each column-postagainst sideways movement by-
placing two small-diameter, 4-ft horizontal poles
just below the ground level on both sides, as
illustrated. Then temporarily place and bracethe
ridgepole in position.
21. For shelters sized for more than 5 occupants,
make and place the inner column-post, or posts.
To avoid cutting a "V"<notched column-post too
short, first carefully "V'vnotch each remaining
column-post, cut it about I in. too long, and trim
it off to fit in its final position under the
ridgepole.
22. If nails at least 4 in. long are available, nail
sloping cross-braces to the inner sides of the
column-posts. If nails are not available, notch
slightly bowed cross-braces and the column-post
as illustrated; then lash or wire them in position.
(Strips of ordinary bedsheets, torn about a foot
wide and twisted together slightly, can be made
to serve as lashing "rope.") To hold the tops of
the column-posts securely against the upperends
of the cross-braces, a tightened "rope"loop that
encircles the tops of the column-posts can be
used.
23. Next put four of the larger-diameter, 9-ft roof-
poles in position, with the outsides of the
outermost two roof poles each only about I in.
from an end of the ridge pole.
24. Place the rest of the 9-ft roof-poles in position,
making sure that all their small ends are
uppermost, and that they are pressed together
and overlap on the ridgepole at least as far as
illustrated. Pack earth between their lower ends.
If the earth is clay, put small spacers of wood
between the ends.
25. At each end of the shelter room, build extra
shelter space and an entryway. Firstposition two
14-ft poles with their upper ends resting on the
outermost wall poles. Study Fig. A.5. Place the
two 14-ft poles 20 in. apart, parallel, and equally
distant from the centerline of the ridgepole. Nail
four 20-in.-Iong spacer-poles between each pair
of 14-ft poles, as illustrated. To make sure that
the upperends do not move beforeearth pressure
holds them in place, tie the upperends of the 14-ft
poles together. Drive a stake against the lower
end of each 14-ft pole, to keep it from slipping
outward. Under the center of each 14-ft pole,
place two supporting, vertical posts.
26. Dig. 4-in.-deep trenches for the lower ends of the
sloping end-wall poles of the main room. These
poles must be cut to length so that their upper
ends will be about 4 in. above the outermost 9-ft
roof pole against which they lean. Dig narrow,
vertical trenches, about 8 in. deep, for all vertical
wall poles that do not press against horizontal
brace poles near the ground.
27. Start· placing the sloping end-wall poles. First
place the longest pole, thenthe shorterpoles-all
touching.
28. Across the open spaces between the 9-ft roof
poles, place limbs andz or sticks roughly hori-
zontally, as shown in the lower left-hand
drawing. Be sure to use limbs or sticks that have
diameters of at least 1/2 in. and put them no
farther apart than 6 in. Leave needles and leaves
on the limbs. Do not leave sharp ends sticking
upward. Do not place more than a 6-in.-thick
mass of limbs and leaves over the side-poles. The
thickness of the earth cover necessary for
excellent fallout protection might be uninten-
tionally reduced by making the limb cover too
thick.
29. Place bedsheets (or 4-mil-thick polyethylenefilm
or equally sturdy material) over the limbs and
sticks to keep earth from falling through the roof.
30. To prevent sand or dry earth from falling
between the cracks where the poles are side by
side, cover these parts of the roof with cloth,
plastic, or paper. If these materials are notavailable, use sticks, leaves, and grass. (In tick or
chigger season, avoid using grass. or leaves from
on or near the ground.)
31. After the entryways are completed, begin to
cover the shelter with earth. Starting from the
ground up, put on a full l-ft thickness of earth
cover. First raise its height about a foot on one
side or end of the shelter, and then on the
other-repeatedly. This is to prevent unequal
loading from tipping the shelter or pushing it
over. (Do not excavate any earth closer than 3ft
to the line of stakes marking the final outer edge
of the completed, 2-ft-thick earth cover.)
32. Fill the spaces between the entryways and the
main room only with earth. (An equal thickness
of wood or other light material provides much
less protection against radiation.)
33. Before placing the rainproofing material for the
"buried roof," smooth the surface of the i-n-
thick earth cover. This will prevent sharp rocks
or sticks from puncturing the plastic or other
rainproofing material. If you do not have
sufficient waterproofing materials to cover the
whole roof, use what isavailable to rainproofthe
central part, on both sides of the ridgepole.
34. To prevent rainwateron the ground outsidefrom
running into the entryways, make mounds of
packed earth about 4 inches high across the
entryway floors, about 2ft from theirouterends.
Dig a shallow drainage ditch completely around
the earth mounded over the shelter.
35. Unless the weather is cold, install your shelter-
ventilating KAP in the entry into which you can
feel air moving naturally. (If short of time or
materials, make a small Directional Fan.)
36. Complete the storage of water and other
essentials.
37. To prevent fallout or rain from falling onto the
floor of the outer entryways, place a small
awning (not illustrated) over each opening.
38. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all waterstored inexpedient containers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water.
Even if only muddy water isavailable, store it. If
you do not have a disinfectant, itmay be possible
to boil water when needed.
39. Put all of your emergency tools inside your
shelter.
40. Astime and materials permit, continueto improve
your chances of surviving by doing as many of the
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemadefallout meter, as described
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Makeand hangexpedientbedsheet-hammocks.
(3) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the air ispumped through with a
KAP.
(4) Dig a stand-up hole near the far end of the
shelter. Make the holeabout 15in. indiameter
and deep enough to permit the tallest of the
shelter occupants to stand erect occasionally.cur LOwE,R ENO.s
- - OF PQLe~ OFF
AeoUT SQUARf!
»:
lH -8 '.... FIC)(Jtr' POLfS
re',otTO !I "" OIAMl!!TE"S)
i,..AID e.ce BY s-ee AND
R!!:STING ONLY Of'-!TH~
SIOl!!!-",..... L Fl'OI-e:~
B"ACE rcor TO J::IT)
SIOI'!-W"'L..L POL..E5 OJ'
THI'! OUTER SECTION
0" E.Nrf'ltY"'AY(~H."4.,.,
LONa AND 3,,.. TO ..5,,,
OIAMl!rE:R.I, STANO'NG
TOv(.HING E..A.Co-l O't"HER,
SIDlr: e- ~IIDl!!!
GROUND Lf:.VEL
r-RI~i!·~"LE- ~
",,., MINIMUM DIA, I
"'FtANlE OF FIVE-PERSON ~tOGE~POLE.5HliU-T e.R
NOT!! I~ i,..A~e NAIL'!> ARe. -----=:=:t-earTONIOFAVAJl-A8Le,!l-IMPl-.Y CH 4;....,
NAIl- TINO$IMIL.AI't~ L-8 f+_ecot-o-e tf€TLO'WGA::)JNO
~~~:g;;POSlTE (A LOG .ATL.EA~T ~ ;....OI.AM!:T"I,Pl: O~ LE.VEL.
SIOI!:~ OF T"~E COL.UMN A2,,,·THI'''' 80ARD AT LEAST 6 or, WIDE)
POST~.I:OR~EL..TERSWlrH
THRI!.E 0 ....MOM COLUMN POSTS
u!* ONL.Y ONE: M"lo,CI! ~T"'E:EN a.-.cl-l Mlllt
OF POST".".NO ~l.Of"\! l!!lAAcES ALTE-R"""'Tti-Y IN oPPO~lr. OlMCTION.5.
5+06 VIt!:¥1 OF THE. C~ $UFJ'fllOfIi':r
"'"RONT VIEW 01"" OUrt!R PART OF: ENTRY""...V
RIOGf: POLE --.111'1-4 (j;o'n DIAMf:1'I!"R
AND4tl-Q,,., LENGrl-4 FOR~:'!>HELTER
8-ft POLE 3'''''TQ
04,,., OI...Mt!Te!A.$ lNi~ k"
BR ....ce (cur TO f':IT)
I"'"",I:.
- l~t~O,"
ONE OF rHRI'!!! r'lRACE:!>
TOE""'L<O no ~-'""LATTEI'JeO S""'OT~' .
O"J INNE-R ~'OE5
0'" THe: rwo UPPER. I
811 ML..r:~ (""T... ~V.t .
TO ... ,,., OI.,I.,.METEIltS) I
....eouT~ .....~~CH
4,n DEEP 'V"-
TRENCH NOT
SHOWN.
qfj F'OLE5 ......IT'H AT
~~~~~~ER"-<\-
~
,
-o
e,
(
"
"
.,
,
~.,
t
I
~,
o
;
L
eHF'Ol-.~ARJ'::.
,sLI(iHrLY
FLATTENED ON
TH&,A INNI!.R --
SjOli~TO......HICH
THE eRACE5 ARE
TOENAIl-ED
NOTE LAOO£R-LIK,
BRACE .-4Qi-OS'rHI
~IDEW'Au.. F=lOL....£S
Of=E-..cHENTR'!"'\oIA'
APART ......~EAR
PRE~5URE. I~
PU$HING'rHI!l
~IOE~~ IN'W'ARI
LINE OF STAKO
TO MARK EDGE
OF 2-H·THICK
E.ARTH COVER.
2"f -1;,. .J
-0 --0---0 -------------
_ /~ ST""'K~ TO Moft,IItKeDGE OF Z It THICK l!ARTH COVE"
-~~~-/-~- - n
g I
~-------l1
"fOP VII.W OF ElYE eC:B~Qf:J RIQg£-POj",£ ;SHILLTIii.R
~.. Ft 01.. --L...---.,. ,.......---J
1<::JPIf'4G PQ..t.S WITH
LOW£.R ENOS IN"V'·
TRtNGH 4,n c£'£'P
r
i
9
S
~ ;... !*IALl-.OW' "y""NOrc.H
IN ~OF COLLlM..... -oST,
r ......T IS.ft.~O .....LONG ---
Ilf IIltIOGI:' POLl' "ONLY
6 .... IN OIAMI'T!'flt.
cvr"","""""eND V,,,,",.~ _~"M!I OJ!. 810<ia~~~.m
:It~p"~~
" 2~"'W
21t·e,... t.ONO~ ......ton·l ..J!i-l5
:~~~~~~ "'~~~5 ~~~-z.""'O""r ~,~~
I~
IUWf\--------
P'''-'''~'~t u \
\
I!.NPOF "H·~ ....
-~lCGE-fIItOL.E
"---------1~MI!. DI!SI(iN()¥
to",~ ENO CL.O~"E
,.,NO INT~'I'''''''Y - - - --- ..
AT TI-II~ END, eor
• \oIITH OF'EN,NG
1 FACING OPP_051TE r---- - ----
i-OlAETN ~
I I
I I
I l-J
__ Zft.-O ....--
TtJPVte\¥OF....-pRIZONTAL L..ADOEJ"-L.It'W ory.c,e
Fig. A.5. Aboveground, Ridgepole Shelter.Appendix A.6
Aboveground, Crib-Walled Shelter
PROTECTION PROVIDED
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor200
(PF 200) if the earth-filled cribs are built to the full
width of 3 ft, as illustrated in Fig. A.6 at the end of
these instructions. (A person in the open outside this
shelter would receive about200 times as much fallout
radiation as he would if inside.) If earth is mounded
to the top of the walls and 3 ft deep over the roof, the
protection factor can be raised to PF 500 or better.
See the accompanying drawing at the end of
Appendix A.6.
Against blast: Better protection than most
homes. Without blast doors, occupants could be
injured-although probably not fatally-at lower
overpressure ranges than those that would destroy
this shelter.
Against fire: Poor, if the shelter is built as
illustrated. The cloth and outer poles would be
unprotected from thermal pulse and other possible
sources of intense heat. However, ifearth ismounded
around the walls so as to cover all exposed cloth and
wood, good fire protection would be provided.
WHERE PRACTICAL
The crib-walled shelter is practical in many
wooded areas and whenever enough poles are
available, or in locations where belowground
expedient shelters are impractical because the water
table or rock is too close to the surface for a covered-
trench shelter.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
For a family or group with three or more
members able to work very hard for most of48 hours.
An unskilled family with an ax or saw and materials
found in most American homes can build this shelter.
No nails are required. (Groups with the nails, tools,
skill, and the number of workers required to build a
RidgepoleShelterare advised to do so; a Crib-Walled
Shelter requires almost twice the total length of poles
and more work to provide shelter for a given number
of persons.)
CAPACITY
The shelter illustrated in Fig. 6.1 isthe minimum
length for 5 persons. For each additional person, add
Ilh ft to the length of the room. (If more than about
12 persons are to be sheltered, build 2 or more
separate shelters.)
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
I. Before beginning work, study the drawing and
read ALL of the following instructions.
2. Divide the work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP
WHEN COMPLETED.
3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed a ventilatingpump (a KAP 20in. wide
and 26 in. high, essential for this shelterexcept in
cool weather) and the storage of at least 15
gallons of water per occupant. (See Appendix B
and Chapter 8.)
4. Start to assemble materials and tools.
A. Essential Materials and Tools
• Poles. (Fresh-cut, green poles are best;
sound, untreated poles are satisfactory.) For
the illustrated 5-person shelter, the required
poles are listed on the following page.Minimum Diameter of Number of Width When All
Use Pole Length Small End Poles Are Laid on
Required the Groun<f
Sidesof longest crib 12~ ft 3 in. 7ft
Sides ofmiddle-sized
crib 10ft 3 in. 7ft
Sidesofshortest crib 7ft 3 in. 7ft
Ends ofall cribs 3~ ft 3 in. 2Ift
Vertical poles at the
comers ofall cribs 3~ ft 2 in. 56
Mainroof 9ft 3~in. 12ft
Entryway roofs 5 ft. 2~in. 22 ft
a
This 'width is the distance measured across a singlelayer ofpoles when a sufficient number ofthem are
laid on the ground side by side and touching, with large ends and small ends alternating so as to cavera rec-
tangular area.
B. Useful Materials and Tools
• Containers for storing 15 gallons '
water per occupant. (See Chapter 8.)
• A total of 30 square yards of rainpro '
ing materials for the illustrated 5-pers (
shelter, and 3 square yards for each ad 5
tional person to be sheltered. (Even ti t
plastic will serve to make a rainproofvburs
roof.")
• Additional saws and shovels, chain sa
pick-mattock, hammer, hatchet.
• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil-to keep
hand-saw from sticking in gummy wood.
• A file.
• Two additional double-bed sheets I
person, or equivalent square-yardage
other equally strong fabric or plastic.
• A measuring tape, yardstick, or rule
• Old newspapers (about 15 pounds).
6. Wear gloves from the start. Even tough haP
can blister and become painful and infected aU
hours of digging and chopping. a
IT
7. Select a shelter location where there islittle oib
chance of the ground being covered with woi
by a hard-rain. ill
I
5. To save time and work, SHARPEN At
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP. 0
• A knife.
• A minimum of 300 ft of wire at least as
strong as clothesline wire. Second choice
would be 300 ft of rope, or (third choice) 8
double-bed sheetsthatcould be torn into I-ft-
wide strips and twisted slightly to serve as
rope. For each additional person beyond 5,
supply 20 ft of wire or rope or halfa double-
bedsheet.
• Rainproof roofing materials-at least 2
square yards per person. Such materials as
plastic film, shower curtains, plastic table-
cloths or plastic mattress covers can be used.
These materials are essential for prolonged
shelter occupancy in rainy, cold weather.
• Fifteen double-bed sheets (or equal
square-yardage of other strong cloth or
plastic).
• Materials for building a ventilating
pump, a KAP 20 inches wide and 30 in. high.
(See Appendix 8.)
• A saw (preferably a bow saw with an
extra blade, or a crosscut saw) and!or an·
ax-for cutting green poles.
• A shovel (one for each two workers is
desirable).
• A pick (if the ground is very hard).
• Two to five large cans, buckets, and!or
pots with bail handles, in which to carry earth
and to store water or wastes later.8. If the building site is near the edge of a woods,
pick a site at least 40 ft from the nearest trees-to
avoid roots.
9. Clear off grass, weeds, etc., from the area where
you plan to build the shelter-this also will help
to avoid chiggers or ticks. Do not remove any
earth.
10. Stake out the entire shelter, locating the 6
required cribs. BE SURE TO MAKE THE
INSIDE LENGTH OF THE MAIN ROOM
EQUAL TO THE NUMBER OF PERSONS
TO BE SHELTERED MULTIPLIED BY Illz
FT. The illustrated shelter issized for 5 persons,
and the poles listed are those required for this
5-person shelter.
II. While some persons are staking out the shelter,
others should be cutting green poles and hauling
them to the site. Cut poles with tops no smaller
than the diameters specified. (Note: the specified
diameters do not include bark.)
12. Select poles with small-end diameters no more
than 509C larger than the specified minimum
diameters. to make handling of the longwall and
roof poles easier.
13. Sort the poles by length and diameter and lay ail
poles of each size together. near the excavation.
14. Use larger trees and poles, up to 6in. in diameter,
to make the 31
z-ft-Iong end-poles of the cribs
(Fig. A.6). Do not use poles with small-end
diameters of less than 3 in. for the side-wall poles
of the cribs. For vertical brace-poles, use poles
with diameters of at least 2 in., cut off at the
height of the upper side of the uppermost
horizontal poles against which they are tied.
15. Be sure to cut off all limbs so that the poles are
quite smooth. Usually it IS easier to drag
smoothed poles to the buildingsite before cutting
them into the required lengths. Pull them by the
small, lighter ends.
16. Determine ifthere areenough long poles to make
the side-poles of the two cribs forming the sides
of the shelter room without splicing two shorter
poles together. If the shelter is being built for
more than 7persons. it will require side poles that
are longer than 151
2 ft. Therefore. if a shelter for
more than 7 persons is being built. it would be
best to use 2 cribs placed end-to-end on each side
of the shelter room. instead of a single crib as
illustrated by Fig. A.6.
17. Place the lowermost four poles of each of the
cribs in their final positions, so that all the bases
of the crib-walls are in position on the ground.
Use the thicker, heavier poles at and near the
bottom ofeach crib. BE SURE THE ROOM IS
LONG ENOUGH TO PROVIDE Il(z FT OF
ROOM LENGTH FOR EACH PERSON TO
BE SHELTERED.
18. To build each crib:
(I) Place two 311z-ft end-poles on the ground.
Put two of the side-poles on top of the two
end-poles so that the ends of all four poles
extend 3 in. (no more) beyond where they
cross. The thicker poles should be used first
to add stability.
(2) Stack additional pairs of end-poles and side-
poles to form the crib, keeping each wall of
the crib vertical, until the tops of the
uppermost side-poles areat least42 in. above
the ground. To keep the uppermost poles of
the crib about level while the crib is being
raised, alternate the large ends and small
ends of poles.
(3) Place a pair of small, vertical brace-poles in
each of the four corners ofthe crib. The tops
of the vertical brace-poles should be no
higher above the ground than the uppersides
of the crib's uppermost horizontal poles.
(4) Tie each pair ofvertical brace-poles together
tightly at bottom, middle, and top. Fortying,
use 3-ft lengths of strong wire, rope, or
slightly twisted, foot-wide strips of cloth at
least as strongas cotton bed sheeting. Square
knots with back-up overhand knots are best,
but three overhand knots-one on top ofthe
other-will hold.
(5) If the crib is more than 8 ft long, place an
additional pair of vertical brace-poles, with
one in position at the outside center of each
long crib-wall. Tie this pair ofvertical brace-
poles together permanently just above the
ground, but not yet in the middle or near the
top ofthe crib. Temporarily tie each of these
center vertical brace-poles to the uppermost
side-pole of the wall it touches.
(6) Line the crib with cloth or plastic film,
making sure that several inches of the lining
hangs over the uppermost poles. So that the
lining will not be pulled down when the crib
is being filled with earth, tie the upperedge ofthe lining to the uppermost wall pole about
every 2 ft. First cut a small hole through
which to thread a tie-string or a 2-in.-wide
tie-strip of cloth. (If plenty of cloth and/or
plastic isavailable for lining the cribs, secure
the lining by simply wrappinga greaterwidth
of the upper edge of the lining around the
uppermost crib wall-pole.)
(7) Permanently tie together the pair of vertical
center brace-poles, using horizontal ties at
their centers and just below the uppermost
horizontal wall-poles of the crib. Use the
strongest material you have for these
horizontal ties across the center of the crib.
(8) Excavate earth 10 ft or so beyond the outer
sides of the cribs. To save work, carry it in
buckets and dump it inside the cribs. (Two
children can carry a heavy bucket of earth by
running a strong, 4-ft stick through the bail
or handle of the bucket and tying the bail to
the center of the stick before lifting.) Save
earth closer to the cribs to put on the roof.
(9) Fill the lined crib with earth from which
almost all grass, roots, and the like have been
removed. Avoid placing hard lumps of earth
in contact with the lining. Fill the crib so that
the surface of the earth inside it is about 4in.
above the upper sides of the uppermost
horizontal poles.
19. Line the narrow spaces between adjacent cribs
with cloth or plastic; then fill these spaces with
eartha littleata time, tampingrepeatedlyso as to
avoid leaving air spaces.
20. Place the 9-ft roof poles over the main room. (If
poles are unavailable and boards 11/2 in. thick are
available, use two thicknesses of boards.) Usethe
strongest roof poles (or double-thickness boards
nailed together) nearest the entryways. Then put
shorter, 5- or 6-ft poles or boards over the
entryways.
21. To keep earth from falling through the cracks
between the roof poles, put sticks in the larger
cracks and coverthe roofwith two or more thick-
nesses of cloth, plastic, or other material. News-
papers will do, if better materials are lacking.
22. Put earth on the roof to the depths shownfor the
illustrated "buried roof." Besure to slope all sides
and smooth this gently mounded earth surfaceso
that the buried roof will shed water.
23. So thatthe earth cover near the outeredges of the
roof will be a full 2 ft thick, make the earth cover
slope steeply near the edges. Steep earth slopes
can be made and kept stable by using large lumps
of turf to make a steep bank, or by using earth-
filled "rolls" of cloth or other material along the
edges of a roof.
24. Put in place the waterproof material of the
buried roof.
25. Pile on the rest of the earth cover, as illustrated,
to at least a full 2-ft thickness.
26. Smooth the surface ofthe earth cover, including
the sides, so that rain will run off. Do not walk on
the finished roof.
27. To prevent rainwater on the ground outside from
running into the entryways, make mounds of
packed earth about4 in. high acrossthe entryway
floors. Make the mounds about 2 ft from the
outer ends of the floors. Dig a shallow drainage
ditch completely around the shelter.
28. Unless the weather is cold, install your shelter-
ventilating KAP in the entry into which you can
feel air moving naturally. (If short of time or
materials, make a small Directional Fan.)
29. To prevent fallout or rain from falling onto the
floor of the outerentryways, place smallawnings
(not illustrated) over the openings.
30. If time and energy are available, mound earth all
around the shelter. Doing so will reduce fire
hazards by covering flammable materials; it also
will increase fallout protection.
31. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all waterstored inexpedient containers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water.
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible
to boil water when needed.
32. Put all ofyour emergency tools inside your
shelter.
33. Astime and materials permit, continue to improve
your chances of surviving by doing as many of the
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemade fallout meter, asdescribed
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Makeand hangexpedient bedsheet-hammocks.
(3) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the air ispumped through with a
KAP.
(4) Dig a stand-up hole near the far end of the
shelter. Make the hole about 15in.indiameter
and deep enough to permit the tallest of the
shelter occupants to stand erect occasionally.ORNL-DWG 74-8130R
r
~
5?
VE:.RTIC.AL ~~
eA!\CL·POl..~_
M.l'llM ........DIAMeTER
2·Vl,,..
r
lZ.V2: H F'DI\ A S~ "[ RSON 5H[lTe:R l
- :51'1 +l~tt3~f -Ift PluS HIl~+_CIAEACH PERSON -..4--:$-M
MlNlMlM .5MALL. t."D 7~t 'S ~~tl'.l~~ICAL
~~'"Jo If ~ I bf
1/1./!3 ar- .:: CR B 112ft rPOLe. POL£:. "J PnI ~
: ,
j
,>112ft: [.JlRT'"H·"u..LO ewe . ,:s.1/2~
PQL "'~GH~~ ~ PCU: >'\A.~ i
. - I _CENT"E.Ro,EJ:fT,CAL -t I I
BRM:E::- POL.£. "
/ / - 3ft+Sf. P...U5 ..,/2A R:R E.a.cH ;:l(.RSON +3ft zs-. t3ff ~
~R or: 'It.RTJCAL. R:LU IN
£.a,C... CORNE::R OF" (,.!=l;IS. TIE.D
TQGt.TMCR I('r fDT"T"O'VI.MIOOlL, P...AN L.OOKIf',jG D<.:l'NN Ct< THE. w......L.S CF /JoN "'SO'VE. - ~ 0
AND TOP (TIE::.3 l:&r SI10'NN) (A16·WALLE:..D ~ELTER (f£FORE. THE: ~ POLe..:;, J>.P£(:t.j)
~ VI£,W CF CRle·WALL
~RNvI(.~IN
PlCTQRIAL Vll,.w ADOvC-
(~WN WITHOUT Ties)
US€:. L-A.ROt:P-r;w.lMETCR
'rnEE:.5 TO Ml..KC r.ND·PQl..t.S
v'c.w I.OOKIf'.ju COWN
IItFl"T'"ICAu.,.t CP-/A (..Ale,-
~NtA. ~I-!OW"INe It Al.IR <:YCCQ-l£..R B'W:.I:.-~t.~""t:o
T(;*T"'r.~ TO ..'£CuRC
COANE:.R
:..£r,TI;:I<
I
e~...u.:·~RTIC"'L
r.fHONcllei:)~
MAKE BOTTOM T,£.
BEf:"~E PuTT'NG SHt:.E.T
1..INING IN oae
SQU.o.P£. K~
>\IITM (.WE;.RHANO -
BACKUP
CENTER 'o'(J<""'iCAl.. E!RKt.-Pl'X..E.(M1"1IMVM ~'..\Au....·E.NO DoAN'LTE.~
• (J: " ..'"" \i'£RT'ICAL ~- POLE.515 2-1/2·" "T ..5rV\AL.l.. END
ALT"El:l"l.-:rE. BIG £NUS fV'.IO uT'-LL EN05
Of:"I'DL.£.5 'TU o<;EEP THE. TOP CF THE.
eRie L..£vE.L ~ 1'- >oS RAI.5£.O.
~Bf:°0~~I~~L.&-b~~~b'-;:EI~E.~~)
MAKE. MIOOLE:: ~,......-rCR PuTTING
~"E.L.T ,-I""'N(;
~~~~~GB,sY':~~'-
K)LE..5IN UNING
~~'f~{~t£R
(,JH(JWrJ TI£'O Tt.(o£.THt.R
~
Nf..AR OO"rl'Otv'I,MIOOLE
.
,...nO TOP Of;"(LMP\.LTLD
(,FlIB-WA,I".l.)
-," ./' ',,"
\,
\\
ROOF"PO..£..3 ..5HOU..O
EACH HAVE. OAMETE,R
~"TLE.A5T ,3-1/2,...
AT Tt-lE. .y.."Au.. t.NO
~D L-EVtL--
E.ARTH <t 2 t.ARTHCOvER "" !! COVt,R
ttt POl.£ {NOT INCLVDlNG PO!N'" ,-- -
'T~."~~
~~
~~---~ ~... \.lIce.
(ARTH-I'II.L.ED·~L
MAOC CF 9£.0 51-1([1;orl'ER (L.orH OR PI,.A.STIC
~E..5I.PE. ~I~O ROOF ~LOPE~ i(QAusc u.....",SOF"TUR_ TO
()JTWARD mWA~ MAKE. THE E.CGES CFeon..~Iot:.s THE. ROC!f"" COVE.R ~TE.E.P)
~~\RI-INPFIOC*" OUl:lrco ~//0..V//A" I
~V//A''''
ENTf<YWAY R()Qr POL.£,s
MINIMLM ,sMAL.L-E:.ND
DAMETE.R 2-1/2. '"
MIN'MIJv\ l.£..NG;H 5 ft
"U..L5 AT THE E.N05 \
I'f;;::.:.-..rp
"Illillll~~i~111
"
" ~Ijli!;II~
"""::
~II __
"" i""..w-V"J)-'
'~J::::"~L _
a'_r"-- ---
PI".ACE. S"I'lONGE.~T ROOF'
MAIN ROOM iI'tOClf" POLc,sMIN'MlJ!',I\ ~u...£.NO
[)IAMCT'C-P. -3'.....in
MINIMUM l.LNQTH .9ft.
U\R'T' ...-f:"IL.LI:'O
CAI8·\W>1..L.,s _.
PLAN LOOKING [)()oNN ON .sti(.LTE.R ROOf'"..stOwING
Pl.J'lC£~ CF ROQI""ING POL..£.S CN THE.
EARTH-F"I~l..E.D CRI~ OJ:'CRlB-wN.o.&.D -""4E.L.T~R.
vtRTJCAL CROSS·seCTION (()J1'-A'NfA..,() Of:' ROOM OF'
A~M!.t..o_ ~~ CRe·~_J..tC ,5t4t~TtR
Fig. A.6. Aboveground, Crib-Walled Shelter.Appendix B
How to Make and Use a Homemade
Shelter-Ventilating Pump, the KAP
I. THE NEED FOR SHELTER AIR PUMPS
In warm weather, large volumes of outside air
MUST be pumped through. most fallout or blast
shelters ifthey are crowded and occupied for aday or
more. Otherwise, the shelter occupants' body heat
and water vapor will raise the temperature-humidity
conditions to DANGEROUSLY high levels. If
adequate volumes of outdoor air are pumped
through typical belowground shelters in hot weather,
many times the number of persons could survive the
heat than otherwise could survive in these same
shelters without adequate forced ventilation. Even-in
cold weather, about 3 cubic feet per minute(3cfm) of
outdoor air usually should be pumped through
shelters, primarily to keep the carbon dioxide
exhaled by shelter occupants from rising to harmful
concentrations.
The KAP (Kearny Air Pump) isa practical, do-
it-yourself device for pumping adequate volumes of
cooling air through shelters-i-with minimum work.
The following instructions have been improved
repeatedly after being used by dozens ofsmall groups
to build KAPs-inciuding families, pairs of house-
wives, and children. None of these inexpert builders
had previously heard of this kind of pump, yetalmost
all groups succeeded in making one in less than 4
hours after assembling the materials. Their successes
prove that almost anyone,ifgiven these detailed and
thoroughly tested instructions, can build a ser-
viceable, large-volume air pump of this simple type,
using only materials and tools found in most
American homes.
If possible, build a KAP large enough to pump
through your shelter at least 40 cubic feet per minute
(40 cfm) of outdoor air for each shelter occupant. If
40 cfm of outdoor air is pumped through a shelter
and distributed within it as specified below, even
under heat-wave conditionsthe effective temperature
of the shelter air will not be more than 2°F higher
than the effective temperature outdoors. (The
effective temperature is a measure of air's effects on
peopledue to its heat, humidity, and velocity.) The
36-inch-high by 29-inch-wide KAP described in these
instructions, if used as specified, will pump at least
1000 cfm of outside air through a shelter that has the
airflow characteristics outlined in these instructions.
If more than 25 persons might be expected to
occupy a shelter during hot weather, then it is
advisable to build a larger KAP. The 72-inch-high by
29-inch-wide model described can pump between
4000 and 5000 cfm.
To maintain tolerable temperature-humidity
. conditions for people in your shelter during hot
weather, you must:
• Pump enough outdoor air all the way through
the shelter (40 cfm for each occupant in very hot,
humid weather).
• Distribute the air evenly within the shelter. Ifthe
KAP that pumps air through the shelter does not
create air movement that can be felt inall parts of the
shelter in hot weather, one or more additional KAPs
will be needed to circulate the air and gently fan the
occupants.
• Encourage the shelter occupants to wear as little
clothing as practical when they are hot. (Sweat
evaporates and cools best on bare skin.)• Supply the occupants with adequate water and
salt. For prolonged shelter occupancy under heat-
wave conditions in a hot part of the country, about 4
quarts of drinking water and 113 ounce(1tablespoon)
of salt per person are required every 24 hours,
including salt in food that iseaten. Normal American
meals supply about 1/4ounce of salt daily. Salt taken
in addition to that in food should be dissolved in the
drinking water.
• Pump outdoor air through your shelter day and
night in warm weather, so that both the occupants
and the shelter are cooled off at night.
Almost all of the danger from fallout iscaused by
radiation from visible fallout particles of heavy, sand-
like or flakey material. The air does not become
radioactive due to the radiation continuously given off
by fallout particles.
The visible fallout particles rapidly "fall out" of
slow moving air. The air that a KAP pumps through
a shelter moves at a low speed and could carry into
the shelter only a very small fraction of the fallout
particles thatcause the radiation hazard outside. This
fraction, usually not dangerous, can be further
reduced if occupants take the simple precautions
described in these instructions.
CAUTION
Before anyone starts to build this unusual type
of air pump, ALL WORKERS SHOULD READ
THESE INSTRUCTIONS AT LEAST UP TO
SECTION V, INSTALLATION. Otherwise, mis-
takes may be made and work may be divided
inefficiently.
When getting ready to build this pump, all
workers should spend the first half-hour studying
these instructions and getting organized. Then, after
materials are assembled, two inexperienced persons
working together should be able to complete the 3-
foot model described in the following pages in less
than 4 hours. To speed up completion, divide the
work; for example, one person can start making the
flaps while another begins work on the pump frame.
II. HOW A KAP WORKS
As can be seen in Figs. 1and 2, a KAP operates
by being swung like a pendulum. It is hinged at the
top of its swinging frame. When this air pump is
pulled by a cord as illustrated, its flaps are closed by
air pressure and it pushesair in front of it and "sucks"
ORNL-DWG 66-12320A
~"'" _""oo<,,~,""'''')
. /
PULL CORD
(SLACK)
Fig. 1. Section through the upper part of a
doorway, showing operation of a KAP.
ORNL-DWG 66-12319A
SHELTER
AREA
DOOR CASING
\------
\
PULL CORDSLACK
DURING RETURNSTROKE
SWINGING
PUMP FRAME
COVERING OVER UNUSED
LOWER PART OF DOORWAY
Fig. 2. KAP indoorway(withflaps openduring
its return stroke).
air in back of it. Thus a KAP pumps air through the
opening in which it swings. This is the power stroke.
During its power stroke, the pump's flaps are closed
against its flap-stop wires or strings, which are
fastened across the face of the frame.
When a KAP swings freely back as a pendulum
on its return stroke, all its flaps are opened by airpressure. The pumped air stream continues to flow in
the direction in which it has been accelerated by the
power stroke, while the Dump itself swings in the
opposite direction (see Fig. 2). Thus the flaps are
one-way valves that operateto force air to flow in one
direction, where desired.
The KAP can be used: (I) to supply outdoor air
to a shelter, (2) to distribute air within a shelter,
and/ or to fan the occupants.
1. To force outdoorairthrougha shelter,an air-
supply KAP usually is operated as an air-intake
pump by pulling it with a cord (see Fig. I). (Only
rarely is it necessary to operate a KAP as an air-
exhaust pump bypushing it with a pole, as described
in the last section of these instructions.)
2. To distribute air within a shelter and/or to
fan the occupants, air-distribution KAPs may be
hung overhead and operated as described later.
III. INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING A KAP
In this section, instructions are given for making
a KAP 36 inches high and 29 inches wide, to operate
efficiently when swinging in a typical home basement
doorway 30 inches wide. If your doorway or other
ventilation opening is narrower or wider than 30
inches, you should make your KAP I inch narrower
than the narrowest opening in which you plan to
install it. Regardless of the size of the KAP you plan
to build, first study the instructions for making the
36 X 29-inch model.
In Section VII you willfind briefinstructions for
making a narrower and even simpler KAP, one more
suitable for the narrow openings of small trench
shelters and other small expedient shelters. Section
VIII covers large KAPs, for large shelters.
A. Materials Needed for a KAP
36 inches High by 29 inches Wide
The preferred material is listed as first (1st)
choice, and the less-preferred materials are listed as
(2nd), (3rd), and (4th) choices. It is best to assemble,
spread out, and check all your materials before
beginning to build.
I. The pump frame and its fixed support:
• Boards for the frame:
(Ist) 22 ft of I X 2-in. boards. (A nominal
X 2-in. board actually measures about
3/4 X 1_3/4 in., but the usual, nominal dimen-
sions will be given throughout these instruc-
tions.) Also, 6ft of IX I-in. boards. Soft wood
is better.
(2nd) Boards of the same length that have
approximately the same dimensions as 1 X 2-
in. and 1 X I-in. lumber.
(3rd) Straight sticks or metal strips that
can be cut and fitted to makea flat-faced KAP
frame.
• Hinges: (lst) Door or cabinet butt-hinges; (2nd)
metal strap-hinges; (3rd) improvised hinges made of
leather, woven straps, cords, or 4 eyescrews which
can be joined to make 2 hinges. (Screws are best for
attaching hinges. If nails are used, they should go
through the board and their ends should be bent over
and clinched-flattened against the surface of the
board.)
• A board for the fixed horizontalsupport: (1st) A
] X 4-in. board that is at least I ft longer than the
width of the opening in which you plan to swing your
pump; (2nd) A wider board.
• Small nails (at least 24): (1st) No.6 box nails,
about 1/2 in. longer than the thickness of the two
boards, so their pointed ends can be bent over and
clinched); (2nd) other small nails.
2. The flaps (See Figs. I, 2, 6, 7, and 8):
• Plastic film or other very light, flexible materi-
al-12 square feet in pieces that can be cut into 9
rectangular strips, each 30 X 51/2 in.: (lst) polyeth-
ylene film 3 or 4 mils thick(3 or 4one-thousandths of
an inch); (2nd) 2-mil polyethylene from large trash
bags; (3rd) tough paper.
• Pressure-sensitive waterproof tape, enough to
make 30 ft of tape 3/4 in. to 1in. wide, for securingthe
hem-tunnels of the flaps: (Ist) cloth duct tape (silver
tape); (2nd) glass tape; (3rd) scotch tape; (4th) freezer
or masking tape, or sew the hem tunnels. (Do not use
a tape that stretches: it may shrink afterward and
cause the flaps to wrinkle.)
3. The flap pivot-wires:
(1st) 30 ft of smooth wire at least as heavy and
springy as coat hanger wire, that can be made into
very straight pieces each 29 in. long (nine all-wire
coat hangers will supply enough); (2nd) 35 ft of
somewhat thinner wire, including light, flexible
insulated wire; (3rd) 35ft ofsmoothstring, preferably
nylon string about the diameter of coat hanger wire.ORNL DWG 71-7003
IX2-in. FRAME
\
Fig. 3. KAP frame (looking at the back side of
the frame).
1x:in. CENTER BRACE
NAIL HEADS
It the irame is made ot only one thickness oi
board 3/4in. to I in. thick, it will not be sufficiently
heavy to swing back far enough on its free-swinging
return stroke.
NOTE:
ALL WOOD FOR FRAME
IS CUT FROM IX2 in.
EXCEPT I XI in. CENTER
BRACE
b. To make the front side smooth and flat so
that the flaps will close tightly, fill in the spaces as
follows: Cut two pieces of 1 X 2-in. boards long
enough to fillinthe spaceson top of the 36-in. sides of
the frame between the top and bottom horizontaf
boards, and nail these 1i\ler boards in place. Do the
samethingwith a \ Y-. \ -in. board (or a board the srze
of that used for the centerbrace) as a filler board for
the center brace (see Fig. 4).
36in.
t. "Ihe {tame
NOTE THAT THE WIDTHS AND THICK-
NESSES OF ALL FRAME PIECES ARE EXAG-
GERATED IN ALL ILLUSTRAnONS.
4. The pull cord:
(Ist) At least 10 ft of cord; (2nd) strong string;
(3rd) flexible, light wire.
B. Tools-
a. Cut two pieces of I X2-in. boards, each36 in.
long, and two pieces of I X 2-in. boards, each 29 in.
iong; then nail them together(see Fig. 3). Use nails
that do not split the wood, prekrably longenoughto
go through the boards and stick out about l/Zin. on
the otherside. (To nail inthis manner, first put blocks
under the frame so that the nail points will not strike
the floor.) Bend over nail points which go through.
A hammer, saw, wirecutter pliers, screwdriver,
scissors, knife, yardstick, and pencil are desirable.
However, only a strong, sharp knife is essential for
making some models.
5. The flap-stops:
• (Ist) 150 ft of light string; (2nd) 150ft of light,
smooth wire; (3rd) 150ft of very strong thread; (4th)
600 ft of ordinary thread, to provide 4 threads for
each stop-flap.
• (ist) 90 tacks (not thumbtacks); (2nd) 90 small
nails. (Tacks or nails are desirable but not essential,
since the flap-stops can be tied to the frame.)
C. Building a KAP36inches High by29inches Wide
A 36X29-in. KAP ismosteffective ifoperated in
an air-intake or exhaust opening about 40 in. high
and 30 in. wide. (Ifyourshelter might have more than
25 occupants in hot weather, read all these
instructions so you will understand how to build a
larger pump, briefly described in Section VIII.)
~e"l'..\, cutanuna\\\o\\\elramea p\ece0\ \ Y-. \-\n.
lumber 36 in. long, for a center vertical brace. (Ifyou
lack time to make or to find a I X I-in. board, use a
I X 2-in. board.) Figure 3 shows the back side of the
frame: the flap valves will be attached on the front
(the opposite) side.CENTER
VERTICAL BRACE SIDE VIEW
BACKFRONT.
FILLER
BOARD
B
2. The hinges
Ordinary door butt-hinges are
best. So that the pump can swing
past the horizontal position, the
hinges should be screwed onto the
front of the frame. at its top, inthe
positions shown in Fig. 4. (Pick
one of the 29-in. boards and call it
the top.) If you do not have a drill
for drilling a screw hole, you can
make a hole by driving a nail and
then pulling it out. Screw the
screw into the nail hole.
NOTE HINGES ARE ON
THE FAR (= THE FRONT)
SIDE OF FRAME
Fig. 4. Completing the frame.
3. The pivot-wires and flaps
a. Make 9 flap pivot-wires. Ifyou have smooth,
straight wire as springy and thick as coat hangerwire,
use it to make nine 29-in.-long straight lengths of
wire. Ifnot. use wire from all-wire coat hangers or use
strings. First, cut off all of the hook portion of each
coat hanger, including the twisted part. If you have
only ordinary pliers, use the cutter to "bite" the wire
all around; it will break at this point if bent there.
'>ext. straighten each wire carefully. Straighten all
the bends so that each wire isstraight within '/4 in., as
compared to a straight line. Proper straightening
takes I to S minutes per wire. To straighten,
repeatedly grasp the bent part of the wire with pliers
in slightly different spots, each time bending the wire
a little with vour other hand. Then cut each wire to a
29-in. length. Finally, bend no more than 1/2 in. of
each end at a right angle and in the same plane-that
is. in directions so that all parts of the bent wire will
lieflat against a smooth surface. The bent ends are for
secure attachment later (see Fig. 8).
b. Make 9 polyethylene flaps that will be the
hinged valves of the KAP. First 'cut 9 strips,
making each strip 30 in. long by SI/2-in. wide (see
Fig. S). To cut plastic flaps quickly and accurately,
cut a long strip of plastic 30 in. wide. Then cut off a
flap in this way: (I) draw a cutting guideline on a
wide board SI/2 in. from an edge; (2) place the
30-in.-wide plastic strip so that it lies on this board,
with one of the strip's side edges just reaching the
edge of the board; (3) place a second board over
ORNL OWG 71-1004A
Fig, 5.the plastic on the first board, with a straight edge
of this second upper board over the guideline on
the lower board; and finally (4) cut off a flap by
running a sharp knife along the straight edge of the
upper board.
To form a hem along one of the 30-in. sides of
a 51h X 30-in. rectangular strip, fold in a l-in. hem.
This makes the finished flap 41h in. wide.
To hold the folded hem while taping it, paper
clips or another pair of hands are helpful. For each
hem, use two pieces of pressure-sensitive tape, each
about I in. wide and 16 in. long. Or make the hem
by sewing it very close to the cut edge to form a
hem-tunnel" (see Fig. 5).
After the hem has been made, cut a notch with
scissors in each hemmed corner of the flap (Figs. 6
and 8). Avoid cutting the tape holding the hem.
Each notch should extend downward about 1/2 in.
and should extend.horizontally from the outer edge
of the flap to 1/4 in. inside the inner side of the
frame, when the flap is positioned on the frames as
shown in Fig. 6.
QRNL-DWG 66-12324
BRACE
Fig. 6. Sizes of notches in flaps.
Also cut a notch in the center of the flap
(along the hem line) extending 1/2 in. downward
and extending horizontally 1/4 in. beyond each of
the two sides of the vertical brace (see Fig. 6). The
notch MUST be wider than the brace. [However, if
you are building a pump using wire netting for
flap-stops (see Fig. 13), then do NOT cut a notch in
the center of each flap.]
c. Take the 9 pieces of straightened wire and
insert one of them into and through the hem-tunnel
of each flap, like a curtain rod running through the
hem of a curtain. Check to see that each flap
swings freely on its pivot-wire, as illustrated by Fig.
7. Also see Fig. 8.
ORNL-DWG 66-t2325
Fig. 7. End view.
ORNL DWG 71-7005A
29-in. PIVOT-WIRE
WITH ENDS B.ENT UP 1;2 in
Fig. 8.199
0 ..
~~
5'
:0
c~r~f'Tl _.
:0::'
"°:0 (101
~~
l> -.
:o?
~
z
G')
(101
~~0-.(J):::J
- .-i
0Z
(J)
°Ul" Ul
"Ci)' ..r _.
l>:::J
~
~
<0-i
I
~
::u
f'Tl
(J)
l>
Z0
"r
l>
~
I
(J)
-i
0
~(J)
NOTE:
SKETCH NOT DRAWN
TO SCALE
PIVOT-WIRE
POSITIONS OF TWO
ADJACENT PIVOT-WIRES
3% in. APART.
4 "STOPS" %in. APART.
USE RULE ON EDGE OF
PAGE.
Fig. 11. Positions ofpivot-wires and flap-stops.
ORNL-DWG 71-7007A
Ifyou have tacks (NOTthumbtacks) or verysmall
nails, drive three in a horizontal line to attach each
flap-stop-one ineach ofthe two vertical 36-in.sides of
the frame and one in the vertical center brace (see
Fig. II). First, drive all of these horizontal lines of
tacks about three-quarters of the way into the
boards. Then, to secure the flap-stop string or thin
wire quickly to a tack, wind the string around the
tack and immediately drive the tack tightly into the
frame to grip the string (see Fig. II).
If you have no tacks or nails, cut notches or
slots where the flap-stops .are to be attached. Cut
these notches in the edges of the vertical sides of
the frame and in an edge of the center brace. Next,
secure the flap-stops (strings or wires) by tying each
4. The flap-stops
So that the flaps may swing open on only one
side of the frame (on its front, or face), you must
attach horizontal flap-stops made of strings or
wires across the face of the frame. (See Figs. 10and
II.) Nailor tie four of these flap-stops between the
marked points where each pair of the horizontal
pivot-wires for the flaps will be placed. Be careful
not to connect any flap-stops in such a way that
they cross the horizontal open spaces in which you
later will attach the flap pivot-wires.
MARKS FOR FLAP
PIVOT-WIRES. ALL
3 o/a·tn. APART
;>
29in.
v~
36 In
Fig. 9.
Fig. 10.
HINGES IN FRONT ------r
ORNL OWG 71-7006A
d. Put aside the flaps and their pivot-wires for
use after you have attached the flap-stops and the
hinges to the frame, as described below.
e. Using the ruler printed on the edge of this
page, mark the positions of each pivot-wire (the
arrowheads numbered 0, 35/8, 71/4 in.) and the
position of each flap-stop (the four marks between
each pair of numbered arrowheads on this ruler).
All of these positions should be marked both on
the vertical sides of the 36-in.-Iong boards of the
frame and on the vertical brace. Mark the position
of the uppermost pivot-wire (the "0" arrowhead on
this ruler) I 4 in. below the top board to which the
hinges have been attached (see Figs. 9 and 10).ORNL- OWG 66-12330AR
IV. MORE RAPID CONSTRUCTION
Fig. 12. Hinge is attached so pump can swing
180 degrees.
(THIS DRAWING IS
NOT TO SCALE 1
BACK OF PUMP
~
I
~
'..'.''I
I
~.
1
12V2 in.
I
PULLCORD
ATTACHED
ABOUT tin.
ABOVE THE
fOURTH fLAP
fROM THE TOP
FLAPS SHOULD
OVERLAP 34 in.
TO 1 in.
HORIZONTAL
SUPPORT (NQ1 DIRECTLY
ABOVE THE PUMP FRAME 1
(Skip this section if you cannot easily get
chicken wire and l/4-in.-thick boards.)
If chicken wire and boards about 1/4in. thick
are available, use the chicken wire for flap-stops.
By using these materials, the time required to build
a given KAP can be reduced by about 40%.
One-inch woven mesh is best. (Hardware cloth has
sharp points and is unsatisfactory.)
Figure 13 illustrates how the mesh wire should
be stapled to the KAP frame. Next, unless the KAP
is wider than 3 ft, the front of the whole frame
(except for the center brace) should be covered with
thin boards approximately 1/ 2 in. thick, such as
laths. Then the pivot-wires, with their flaps on
them, should be stapled onto the l/4-in.-thick
boards. This construction permits the flaps to turn
freely in front of the chicken-wire flap-stops.
With this design, the center of each pivot-wire
should NOT be connected to the center brace, nor
should the center of the flap be notched. However,
pivot-wires that are attached this way must be
made and held straighter than pivot-wires used
with flap-stops made of straight strings or wires.
one in its notched position. This tying should
include wrapping each horizontal flap-stop once
around the vertical center brace. The stops should
be in line with (in the same plane as) the front of
the frame. Do not stretch flap-stops too tightly, or
you may bend the frame.
5. Final assembly
a. Staple, nail, or tie the 9 flap pivot-wires or
pivot-strings (each with its flap attached) in their
positions at the marked 35/s-in. spacings. Start with
the lowest flap and work upward (see Fig. 11).
Connect each pivot-wire at both ends to the 36-in.
vertical sides of the frame. Also connect it to the
vertical brace. BE CAREFUL TO NAIL THE
PIVOT-WIRES ONLY TO THE FRAME AND
THE BRACE. DO NOT NAIL ANY PLASTIC
DIRECTLY TO THE WOOD. All flaps must turn
freely on their pivot-wires.
If any flap, when closed, overlaps the flap
below it by more than 1 in., trim off the excess so
that it overlaps by only 1 in.
b. Screw (or nail, if screws are not available)
the upper halves of the hinges onto the horizontal
support board on which the KAP will swing. (A
l-in.-thick board is best, 31/ 2 in. wide and at least
12 in. longer than the width of the doorway or
other opening in which this KAP is to be installed.)
Be careful to attach the hinges in the UNusual,
OUT-OF-LINE POSITION shown in Fig. 12.
CAUTIONS: Do NOT attach a KAP's hinges
directly to the door frame. If you do, the hinges
will be torn loose on its return stroke or on its
power stroke.
If you are making a KAP to fit into a
rectangular opening, make. its frame 4 in.
SHORTER than the height of its opening and 1 in.
NARROWER than the width of the opening.
c. For this 3-ft model, tie the pull-cord to the
center brace about lil2 in. below the hinge line, as
shown in Fig. 12. (If you tie it lower, your arm
movements will waste energy.) Use small nails or
wire to keep the tie end from slipping up or down
on the center brace. (For a more durable
connection, see Fig. 22.)
Cut a slot in the flap above the connection of
the pull-cord to the vertical brace, deep enough so
that this flap will close completely when the KAP is
being pulled. Tape the end and edges of the slot.ORNL-DWG 66-12333A
Fig. 13. Flaps attached 1/4 inch in front of
chicken wire used for flap-stops.
Note in Fig. 13 that each pivot-wire is held firm
and straight by 2 staples securing each end. The
wire used should be at least as springy as coat
hanger wire. If string is used instead of wire, nylon
cord about the diameter of coat hanger wire is best
for the pivot-strings.
If the KAP is wider than 3 ft, its center vertical
brace should also be covered with a 1/4-in.-thick
board, and each pivot-wire should be attached to it.
Furthermore, the center of each flap should be
notched.
v. INSTALLATION AND ACCESSORIES
A. Minimum Open Spaces Around a KAP
To pump its maximum volume, an air-supply
KAP with good metal hinges should be installed in
its opening so that it swings only about 1/2 in. above
the bottom of the opening and only 1/2 in. to 1 in.
from the sides of the opening.
B. Adequately Large Air Passageways
When using a KAP as an air-supply pump to
force air through a shelter, it is essential to provide
a low-resistance air passageway all the way through
the shelter structure from an outdoor air-intake
opening for outdoor air to a separate air-exhaust
opening to the outdoors (see Fig. 14).
66-12331AR2
TO LESSEN ENTRY OF FALL-
iT IS BETTER TO PUT
IN UPPER HALF OF
DOC)RVVAY, AND COVER LOWER
PREFERABLY PUMP IN THE
SAME DIRECTION AS THE
NATURAL AIR FLOW AT
THAT TIME.
I/
~ /
~
~UTDOOR AIR FLOWING
I \<THROUGH LOW-RESISTANCE
-, ~ PASSAGEWAYS FROM OUT-
DOORS
LOW-RESISTANCE AIR PASSAGEWAY
TO OUTDOORS (AT LEAST HALF ,I'J HORIZONTAL
I AS BIG AS THE KAP). ~ \ FIXED SUPPORT
i ....--!-- . 'I_:- r,
- - PULL-CORD PULLING I
I( \
,il I"~~,.~.~:: ~))~ .>:.>: )<-~-
II SHELTER SPACE.-/ 1
~LASTIC OR CLOTH 'I,
\
~ COVERiNG UNUSED
~ PART OF DOORWAY
Fig. 14.A low-resistance air passageway is one that is
no smaller in cross-sectional area than half the size
of the KAP pumping the air. For example, a
36 X 29-in. KAP should have a passageway no
smaller than about 3112 sq. ft. An air-supply KAP of
this size will force at least 1000 cubic feet per
minute (1000 cfm) through a shelter having such
openings, if it is installed"as illustrated in Fig. 14.
If smaller air passageways or air-exhaust
openings are provided, the volume of air pumped
will be greatly reduced. For example, if the
air-exhaust opening is only 13/4 sq. ft e/4 the size of
this KAP), then this KAP will pump only about
500 cfm. A!1d if the air-exhaust opening is only a
6 X 6-in. exhaust duct e/4 sq. ft), then this same
36 X 29-in. KAP will pump only about 50 cubic
feet per minute. This would not provide enough
outdoor air for more than one shelter occupant in a
well-insulated shelter under heat-wave conditions in
the hottest humid. parts of the United States. In
contrast, when the weather is freezing cold and the"
shelter itself is still cold enough to absorb the heat
produced by the shelter occupants, this same
6 X 6-in. exhaust duct and the air-intake doorway
will cause about 50 cfm of outdoor air to flow by
itself through the shelter without using any pump.
The reason: body heat warms the shelter air, and
the warm air rises if cold air can flow in to replace
it. Under these cold conditions-provided the air is
distributed evenly throughout the shelter by KAP
or otherwise-50 cfm IS enough outdoor arr for
about 17 people.
To provide adequately large air passageways
for air-supply KAPs used to ventilate shelters in
buildings, in addition to opening and closing doors
and windows, it may be necessary to build large
ducts (as described below). Breaking holes in
windows, ceilings, or walls is another way to make
large, efficient air passageways.
Figure 15 illustrates how a 3-ft KAP can be
used as a combined air-supply and air-distribution
pump to adequately ventilate a small underground
shelter that has an exhaust opening too small to
provide enough ventilation in warm weather. (A
similar installation can be used to ventilate a
basement room having only one opening, its
doorway.) Note how, by installing a "divider" in
the doorway and entryway, the single entryway is
converted into a large air-intake duct and a
separate, large air-exhaust duct. To obtain the
maximum increased volume of fresh outdoor air
that can be pumped through the shelter-a total of
about 1000 cfm for a 36 X 29-in. KAP-the divider
should extend about 4 ft horizontally into the
shelter room, as shown in Fig. 15. The 6 ft at the
end of the divider (the almost-horizontal part under
the KAP) can be made of plywood, provided it is
installed so that it can be taken out of the way in a
few seconds.
ORNL DWG 72-6630
FALLOUT ROOF (PLASTIC
OR CLOTH) ON RIDGEPOLE
"WALL" ALL AROUND
ENTRYWAY
~~;;:~:- EARTH ON BOTTOM~ <»: OF "WALL"'~ 0.'_
',,' "STAKE SUPPORTING 2-ft-HIGH
"WALL" OF PLASTIC OR CLOTH
AROUND VERTICAL ENTRYWAY
ENTRYWAY DIVIDER
(PLASTIC OR CLOTH)
\
VENT[LATION DUCT
i
THAT [S TOO SMALL IN
WARM WEATHER
ENTERING AIR RISES.
LEAVING FALLOUT 'l~
~ ;X PARTICLES OUTSlOE "
~J "\
Fig. 15. Ventilating a shelter when the air-exhaust opening is too small.Note how the entry of fallout into a shelter can
be minimized by covering the entryway with a"roof"
and by forcing the slow-moving entering air to rise
over an obstruction (the "wall") before it flows into
the shelter. The sand-like fallout particles fall to the
ground outside the "wall."
C. Adequate Distribution of
Air Within the Shelter
To make sure that each shelter occupant gets a
fair share of the outdoor air pumped through the
shelter, air-distribution KAPs should be used inside
most large shelters. These KAPs are used within the
shelter, separate from and in addition to air-supply
KAPs (see Fig. 16).Air-distribution KAPs can serve
in place of both air-distribution ducts and cooling
fans. For these purposes, one or more 3-ft-high KAPs
hung overhead from the shelter ceiling are usually
most practical. IfKAPs cannot readily be hung from
the ceiling, they can be supported on light frames
made of boards or metal, somewhat like those used
for a small child's swing.
KAP for every 25 occupants. In relatively wide
shelters, these interior KAPs should be positioned so
that they produce an airflow that circulates around
the shelter, preventing the air that is being pumped
into the shelter from flowing directly to the exhaust
opening. Figure 16illustrates how four KAPs can be
used in this way to distribute the air within a shelter
and to fan the 100occupants of a 1000-sq.-ft shelter
room. Avoid positioning an air-distribution KAP so
that it pumps air in a direction greater than a right
angle turn from the direction of airflow ~o the
location of the KAP.
D. Operation with a Pulley
A small KAP-especially one with improvised
hinges or one installed at head-height or higher-can
be pulled most efficiently by running its pull-cord
over a pulley or over a greased homemade "pulley"
such as described in Figs. 17and 18.Apulley Should
be 'hung at approximately the same height as the
hinges of the KAP, as illustrated in Fig. 15.To make
ORNL OWG 72-7547 ORNL OWG 71-7242
Fig. 16. The use of air-distribution KAPs.
You should make and use enough KAPs to
cause air movement that can be felt in all parts of
your shelter. Remember that if KAPs are installed
near the floor and the shelter is fully occupied, the
occupants' bodies will partially block the pumped
airflow more than if the same KAPs were suspended
overhead.
As a general rule, for shelters having more than
about 20 occupants, provide one 3-ft air-distribution Fig. 17.
CUT
NOTCHES
BEAT NOTCH OF
GREEN FORK WITH
HAMMER UNTIL
BARK WILL PEEL
OFF, LEAVING
SMOOTH WOOD.
IMPROV1SED "PULLEY" FROM A
WIDE-ANGLED FORKED LIMB.
LUBRICATE NOTCH AND
PULLEY CORD WITH GREASE,
VASELINE, OR EVEN A BAR
OF SOAP - TO PREVENT f
PULLEY-CORD FROM BEING
BURNT BY FRICTION AND
""". ,{
Y-BRIDLE OF LIGHT CORD'
OR WIRE
33ft
I-ORNL DWG 71-7243 ORNL DWG 72-6365A
2 in.
L
END VIEW
1;32 in. SHIM
OR SPACER
DOOR
FRAME
advantage of changes in the direction of natural
airflow through the shelter.
• If the KAP is installed on quick-removal
brackets, in an emergency a person standing beside
the KAP could grasp its frame withboth hands, lift it
upward a few inches to detach it, and carry it out of
the way-s-all in 3 to 5seconds. Beingable to move the
KAP quickly could prevent blast winds from
wrecking the pump, which might also be blown into
your shelter-possibly injuring occupants. In exten-
sive areas where fallout shelters and their occupants
would survive the blast effects of typical large
warheads, more than4 seconds would elapse between
the time shelter occupants would see the extremely
bright light from the explosion and the arrival of a
blast wave strong enough to wreck a KAP or other
pumps left exposed in a ventilation opening.
Note in Fig. 19 that the KAP's "fixed"support-
board (a 31/ z-in.-wide board to which its hinges are
attached) is held in a bracket only 2 inches deep. To
prevent too tight a fit in the bracket, besure to place a
1hz-in. shim or spacer (the cardboard back of a
writing tablet will do) between two boards of the
bracket, as illustrated. Also, make spaces about 1/16
inches wide between the lower inner corners of the
stop-blocks and the sides of the outer board. To
prevent your hands from being cut, you should put
tape over the exposed ends of wires near the frame's
outer edges of a KAP that you want to be able to
remove rapidly.
Fig. 19. Quick-removal bracket for KAP.
BOARD FORMING A
2-in.-DEEP OPEN
BRACKET, WITH AN
APPROX. \.'32-in.
SHIM UNDER IT
QUICKLY REMOVABLE
"FIXED" SUPPORT
FOR KAP __....J
BOARD THE SAME
THICKNESS AS THE
"FIXED" SUPPORT
BOARD OF THE KAP
LUBRICATE NOTCH AND .
PULLEY CORDWITH GREASE,
VASELINE, OR EVEN A BAR
OF SOAP - TO PREVENT
PULLEY-CORD FROM BEING
BURNT BY FRICTION AND
BROKEN.
CUT SADDLE-LIKE NOTCH
(BEST CUT WITH A ROUND
FILE, OR A KNIFE, AND
SANDED)
IMPROVISED" PULLEY"
Fig. 18.
2 X4-IO. BOARD
• A KAP provided with quick-removal brackets
can be taken down easily and kept out of the way of
persons passing through its doorway when it isnot in
use. Itcan be kept ina place where peopleare unlikely
to damage it.
• Byinstalling two sets of quick-removal brackets
in opposite shelter openings, you can quickly reverse
the direction in which the KAP pumps air, to take
E. Quick-Removal Brackets
The air-supply KAP that 'pumps air through
your shelter is best held in its pumping position by
mounting it in homemade quick-removal brackets
(see Fig. 19) for the following reasons:
a comfortable hand-hold on which to pull down-
ward, tie two or three overhand knots in a strip of
cloth on the end of the pull-cord.
(Such a "pulley" can also be used to operate a
bail-bucket to remove water or wastes from some
shelters, without anyone having to go outside.)
BOTTOMS OF SAW
CUTS ARE ';2in.
APART
AFTER SAWING,KNOCK OUT THIS MODIFIED "V"
. /'
~.. ~.
"PULLEY" SUPPORT
CORD OR WIRE
BENT
NAILS--../-R"".....,<,In a small expedient shelter, a small KAP can be
quickly jerked loose if its "fixed" support-board is
attached to the roof with only a few small nails.
VI. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
A. Pumping
Operate your 3-foot KAP by pulling it with an
easy, swinging motion of your arm. To pump the
maximum volume of air, you should pull the KAP
toward you until its frame swings out to an almost-
horizontal position. Then quickly move your hand so
that the pull-cord is kept slackduringtheentire, free-
swinging return stroke. Figure 24 in Section VIII,
LARGE KAPs, illustrates this necessary motion.
Be sure to provide a comfortable hand-hold on
the pull-cord (see Fig. 14). Blisters can be serious
under unsanitary conditions.
To pull a KAP via an overhead pulley with
minimum effort, sit down and pull as If you were
tollinga bell---except that you should raise yourhand
quickly with the return stroke and keep it raised long
enough so that the pull-cord remains slackduringthe
entire return stroke. Or, if the pulley is not overhead,
operate the KAP by swinging your extended arm
back and forth from the shoulder;
B. Placement to Take Advantage of the
Natural Direction of Air Flow
A KAP can pump more air into a shelter if it is
installed so that it pumps air through the shelter in
the direction in which the air naturally flows. Since
this direction can be reversed by a wind change
outdoors. it isdesirable to provide a way to quickly
remove your pumpand reposition it so that air can be
pumped in the opposite direction. This can bedone in
several ways. including making one set of quick-
removal brackets for one air openingand a second set
for the other.
C. Maintenance
To operate your KAP efficiently, keep the flaps
in good repair and make sure that there is the
minimum practicalarea of openspaces inand around
the KAP through which air can flow back around the
pump frame, opposite to the pumped direction. So
keep at least some extra flap material in yourshelter,
along with some extratape and the fewtoolsyou may
need to make repairs.
VII. NARROW KAPs AND SMALL KAPs
A. Narrow KAPs
To swing efficiently in an entrance or emergency
exit of an expedient trench shelter that is22 in. wide,
a KAP isbest made 20in. wide and 36in. high. One of
less height is not as efficient as a 36-in.-high model
and has to be pulled uncomfortably fast. So, when
ventilation openings can be selected or made at least
38 in. high, make your pump 36 in. high.
In a narrow trench shelter, it is best to have the
pull-cord run the full length of the trench, along the
trench wall that occupants will face when sitting.
Then each occupant can take a turn pullingthe pump
without having to change seats.
Good metal hinges on a narrow KAP allow it to
swing properly if pulled with the pull-cord attached
to one side of the frame. (Pumps with improvised
hinges and large pumps must be pulled from a
connection point on their center vertical brace to
make them swing properly.) Therefore, if you have
small metal hinges and need a KAP no wider than 20
inches, build a rectangular frame without a vertical
center brace. Make two pull-cord attachment points,
one on each side of the frame and each 9inches below
the top of the frame. (Fora small KAP, a satisfactory
attachment point can readily be made by drivingtwo
nails so that their heads cross, and wiring them
together.) Then if a change in wind direction outside
causes the direction of natural air flow in the trench
to become opposite to the direction in which air is
being pumped, you can move your KAP to the
opening at the other end of the trench. The pull-cord
can easily be connected to the otherside of the frame,
and convenient pumping can be resumed quickly.So that the horizontal support board can be
nailed easily to the roofing poles or boards ofan entry
trench, it is best to use cabinet hinges. Screw them
onto an edge of the support board, in the ,1.H~Lus.ual,
OUT-OF-LINE POSITION shown in Fig. 20. This
hinge connection allows (he pump to swing a full 180
degrees. To facilitate moving the horizontal support
board, connect it to the roofwith a fewsmall nails, so
that it can be pulled loose easily and quickly.
ORNL-DWG 78-10358
ROOF POLES
HORIZONTAL
SUPPORT BOARD
Fig. 20.
B. Small KAPs
Ifthe only available opening inwhich a KAP can
be installed is small, build a KAP to fit it. Use
narrower boards to make the frame and make the
flaps of thinner material, such as the polyethylene of
large plastic trash bags. For pumps 24 inches or less
in height, make the finished flaps only 31/2 inches
wide and space their pivot-wires 3 inches apart. The
flaps should overlap no more than 1/2 inch. A KAP 24
inches high will pump enough outdoor air for only a
few people, except in cold weather.
Small, yetefficient KAPs can be madeeven ifthe
only materials available are straight sticks about 11/4
inches in diameter, strips of cloth to tie the frame
together and to make the hinges and the pull cord,
polyethylene film from large trash bags for the flaps,
freezer or duct tape (or needle and thread) to make
the flap hems, coat hanger wire or stringfor the pivot-
wire, and string or ordinary thread for the flap-stops.
A sharp knife is the only essential tool. Figure 21
shows a way to easily tie sticks securely together and
to attach strings or threadsfor stop-flaps, when small
nails and tacks are not available. The flap-stop
strings or threads should be secured by wrapping
them several times around each stick to which they
are attached, so they willbe gripped by the out-of-line
knife cuts.
ORNL-DWG 78-21897
"U" NOTCH
GROOVE
(ONLY ON UPPER SIDE)
STOP·FLAP
MADE OF STRING
OR 4 THREADS
KNIFE CUTS
TO SECURE
FLAp·STOPS
Fig. 21. Sticks ready to be tied togetherto make
a KAP frame.VIII. LARGE KAPs
A. Construction
A 6-ft-high by 29-in.-wide model can be
constructed in the same way as a 3-ft model-except
that it should have both horizontal and vertical
center braces (I X 2-in. boards are best). To increase
the strength of a 6-ft KAP, all parts of its double-
thickness frame and its vertical center brace should
be made of two thicknesses of I X 2-in. softwood
boards, securely held together with clinched nails.
Also, to increase the distance that the pump will
swing back by itself during its return stroke, it is
worthwhile to attach a 6-ft piece of 1 X 2-in. board
(not illustrated) to the back of each side of the frame.
Do NOT attach weights to the bottom of the frame;
this would slow down the pumping rate.
This 6-ft-high pump requires 18flaps, each the
same size as those of the 36-in.-high KAP. The flaps
on the lower part ofa large KAP must withstand hard
use. If I 2-in.-wide strips of tape are attached along
the bottom and side edges of these lower flaps, then
even flaps made of ordinary 4-mil polyethylene will
remain serviceable for over 1000hours of pumping.
However, the lower flaps of large KAPs can
advantageously be made of 6-mil polyethylene. The
width and spacing of all flaps should be the same as
those of the 36-in.-high model.
The pull-cord should be attached to the vertical
center brace of a 6-ft KAP about 161/2in. below the
hinge line. A 3; 16-in. nylon cord is ideal.
To adequately ventilate and cool very large and
crowded shelters in buildings, mines, or caves, KAPs
larger than 72 X 29 in. should be used. You can take
better advantage of large doorways, elevator shaft
openings, etc., by "tailor-making" each large air-
supply KAP to the size of its opening-that is, by
making it as large as ispractical. The frame and brace
members should be appropriately strengthened, and
one or more "Y" bridles should be provided, as
described in the section below. A 7-ft-high X 51/2-ft-
wide KAP, with a 1!4-in.-diameter pull-cord attached
18 in. below its hinge line, and with two "Y" bridles
for its two operators, pumped air at the rate of over
11,000 cubic ft per minute through a large basement
shelter during tests.
To make a durable connection of the pull-cord
to the center vertical brace: (I) Attach a wire loop
(Fig. 22) about 161/
2 in. below the hinge line. This
loop can be made of coat hanger wire and should go
around the center vertical brace. This fixed loop
should be kept from slipping on the center brace by
bending four 6-penny nails over it in front as
illustrated, and two smaller nails in back. (2) Make a
free-turning, triple-wire loop connected to the fixed
loop. (3)Coverpartofthe free-turning loop with tape
and tie the pull-cord to this loop. Tie the pull-cord
tightly over the taped part.
ORNL DWG 72-8204
MAKE A 2-;n DIAMETER
SNUG LOOP OF 3 TURNS
OF COATHANGER WIRE.
PRESSURE
SENSITIVE
CLOTH TAPE
FUSED
NYLON
j:)
U«
0°-90
Fig. 22.IX. SOLUTIONS TO SPECIAL PROBLEMS
A. Increasing the Usefulness of Shelters
by Supplying 40 cfm per Planned Occupant
If a shelter is fully occupied for days during hot
weather and iscooled bothday and night bypumping
through it and distributing at least 40 cubic feet per
minute of outdoorair for each occupant-more than
is required to maintain tolerable temperatures at
night-these advantages result: .
• The shelter occupants will be exposed to
effective temperatures less than 2°F higher than the
current effective temperatures outdoors, and at night
will get relief from extreme heat.
• The floors, walls, etc. of a shelter so ventilated
will be cooled at night to temperatures well below
daytime temperatures. Therefore, during the day a
considerable fraction ofthe occupants'body heatwill
flow into the floors, walls, and other parts of the
shelter and less body heat will have to be carried out
by the exhaust airduringthe hottest hours oftheday.
Thus daytime temperatures will be reduced.
• Since the shelter occupants will be cooler and
will sweat less, especially at night, they will need less
water than they would require if the shelter were
ventilated at a rate of less than 40 cfm per occupant.
(If the outdoor air is very hot and desert-dry, it
usually is better to supply less than 40 cfm per
occupant during the hottest hours of the day.)
• Ifthe shelter were to be endangered by the entry
of outside smoke, carbon monoxide or other
poisonous gases, or heavy descending fallout under
windy conditions, ventilation of the shelter could be
temporarily restricted or stopped for a longer period
than would be practical if the shelter itself were
warmer at the beginning of such a crisis period.
I. Gradually start the pump swinging back and
forth, moving your arms and body as illustrated and
pulling mostly with your legs and body.
2. Stand at such a distance from the pump that
you can pull the pump toward you until the forward-
swinging pumpjusttouchesthe tightlystretched pull-
.cord-and at such a distance that you can keep the
pull-cord slack during the whole of the pump's free
backswing.
3. To be sure you do not reduce the amount of
air pumped, rapidly move yourarms forward assoon
as the forward-swinging pump touches the tightened
pull-cord. Hold your arms forward until the pump
again starts to swing toward you.
PULL-CORD
TO PUMP,
\
\
\
\ ,
\ /
" /" /'-- . /'
---
B. Operation of Larger KAPs
A larger KAP can be pulled most easily by
providing it with a"Y"bridle(seeFig. 23)attached to
the end of its pull-cord.
Fig. 24.
KEEP PULL-CORD SLACK DURING ALL
OF FREE BACKSWI~
Fig. 23. Y-bridle for pull-cord on KAP.
TO SECURE KNOT, SLIGHTLY MELT NYLON WITH MATCH.
V-BRIDLE FOR ~ ~ KEARNY AIR ~.
ORNL DWG 71-8069
AT END OF ITS FORWARD SWING, PUMP
SHOULD JUST TOUCH TIGHTENED
PULL-CORD.
ORNL OWG 72-6526
To pump the maximum volume of air with
minimum effort, study Fig. 24 and follow the
instructions given below for operating a large KAP.
A man ofaverage sizeand strengthcan operatea
6 ft X 29 in. KAP by himself, pumping over 4000
cubic feet per minute through a typical large shelter
without working hard; tests have shown that hemust
deliver only about 1/20 of a horsepower. However,
most people prefer to work in pairs-when pulling a
6-ft KAP equipped with a "Y" bridle, when pumping
over 3000 cfm.• The shelter could be occupied beyond its rated
capacity without problems caused by overcrowding
becoming as serious as would be the case it sma\\er-
capacity air pumps were to be installed and used.
B. Pre-Cooling Shelters
If the shelter itself is cooler than the occupants,
more of the body heat of occupants can flow into its
cool walls, ceiling, and floor. Therefore, it would be
advantageous to pre-cool a shelter that may soon be
occupied, especially during hot weather. KAPs (or
other air pumps or fans) can be used to pre-cool a
shelter by forcing .the maximum volume of cooling
outdoor air through the shelter and by distributing it
within the shelter. A shelter should be pre-cooled at
all times when the air temperature outdoors is lower
than the air temperature inside the shelter. Then, if
the pre-cooled shelter is used, the occupants will be
kept cooler at a given rate of ventilation than if the
shelter had not been pre-cooled, because the air will
not have to carryall of their body heat out of the
shelter.
C. Increasing the Effectiveness of a KAP
Ifyou want to increase the volume of air that a
KAP with good metal hinges can force through a
shelter, Install side baffles (see Fig. 25). Side baffles
should be rigidly fixed to form two stationary
"walls," one on each side of the swinging pump
frame. They can be made of plywood, boards, doors,
table tops, or even well-braced plastic. A space or
clearance of 112 to I in. should bemaintained between
the inner side of each baffle and the outer side of the
swinging frame.
By installing side baffles you may be able to
increase the volume of air your KAP will pump byas
much as 20%, if it is ingood repair and the openings
around it are small.
ORNL-DWG GG-12.,,41'.
ALL UNUSED OPENINGS IN
DOORWAY SHOULD BE COVERED
LENGTH OF KEARNY PUMP +2 in
Fig. 25. Side baffles.
D. Operating a KAP as an Exhaust Pump
In some shelters, a KAP can be operated most
effectively by using it as an exhaust pump. This can
be done by pushing it with a push-poleattached to its
center vertical brace. Push-pole operation is some-
times the best way to "suck"outdoorair into a shelter
by pumping air out of the shelter in the natural
direction of air flow; for example, up an elevator
shaft or up a stairwell. This method is especially
useful in those basement shelters in which air-intake
openings are impractical for installing KAPs. This
would be the case ifthe air-intake openingsare small,
exposed windows or holes broken in the ceiling of a
shelter in a building.
To pump a large KAP most effectively with a
push-pole, stand with your back to the KAP and
grasp the push-pole with both hands. Using mostly
your leg muscles, push the KAP by pulling the free
end of its push-pole toward you.Figure 26shows an improvised, flexible connec-
tion of a push-pole attached to the center brace of a
large KAP 28 in. from the top of its frame.
ORNL-OWG 66-'2332R
FLAP
SlOPS
CORD WITH ADJUSTABLE SLIPKNOT
TO HOLD LEATHER TIGHTLY TO END
OF PUSH-POLE
PIECE OF LEATHER (FROM
SHOE UPPER OR WIDE BELT)
SHOWN AFTER
TIGHTENING
ONLY THIS KNOT
9 FOOT LONG WOODEN POLE. 3/~ x 11/4 in.
(WITH UPPER AND LOWER EDGES OF tTS
END RQUNDEOl,l$ BEST FOR A 3-FOOT
MODEL. (OR USE A 1-10- CIA BAMBOO POLE)
STRONG STRINGS nED TIGHTLY
AROUND THE LEATHER (AFTER
EvERYTHING ELSE HAS BEEN DONE)
CENTER BRACE OF
KEARNY PUMP
Fig. 26. Push-pole flexible connection.
E. Ventilating a Shelter with
Only One Opening
Some basement rooms that may be used as
shelters have only one opening, the doorway. A KAP
can be used to ventilate sucha shelter room ifenough
well-mixed and distributed air is movingjust outside
the doorway, or if air from outdoors can be pumped
in by another KAP and made to flow in a hallway or
room and pass just outside this doorway. Figure 27
indicates how to ventilate such a one-opening room
by operating a 3-ft KAP as an air-intake pump inthe
upper part of the doorway.
Below such a doorway KAP, a "divider" 6 ft to
8 ft long can be installed. The divider permitsexhaust
air to flow out of the room without much of it being
"sucked" back into the room by the KAP swinging
above it. Plywood, reinforced heavy cardboard, or
even well-braced plastic can be used to make a
divider. It should be installed so that, in a possible
emergency, it can be jerked out of the way in a few
seconds.
When used with a divider, a 36X29in. KAP can
pump almost 1000 cubic feet' of air per minute into
and out of such a shelter room. Although 1000cubic
feet of well-distributed air is sufficient for several
times as many as 25 shelter occupants under most
temperate climate conditions, it is enough for only
about 25 people in a one-entry room under
exceptionally severe heat-wave conditions. Further-
more, to make it habitable for even 25 people under
such conditions, the air in this room must be kept
from rising more than 2°F above the temperature
outdoors. This can be done using a second air-supply
KAP to pump enough outdoor air through the
building and in some cases also using air-distribution
KAPs in spaces outside the one-entry room. The
KAP in the doorway of a one-entry room should
supply 40 cfm per occupant of this room.
In order to prevent any of the used, warmed,
exhaust air from the one-entry room from being
"sucked"by the doorway KAP back into the room, a
stiffened rectangular duct can be builtsoas to extend
the exhaust-opening (in the lower part of the
doorway) several feet outside the room. Such a duct
can be built of plastic supported by a frame of small
boards. It can be used to discharge the exhaustair far
enough away from the KAP and "downstream"inthe
airflow outside the one-opening room so that no
exhausted air can be "sucked" back into the room.ORNL DWG 72-8203
///
/
\PULL-CORD PULLING
\
~ \. "'~ ~ /,/-----
.Ie--...-- r" '"~ r": Jt"-./------
~ ~ K J? /
f 8-ft "DIVIDER" IN DOORWAY
Fig. 27. Use of a "divider" to ventilate a shelter with only one opening.
F. Installing a KAP in a Steel-Framed Doorway
If you need to install a KAP in a steel-framed
doorway and it is not feasible to screw or otherwise
permanently connect it to the doorway, you can
attach the KAP by using a fewboards and some cord,
as illustrated by Figs. 28 and 29. The two horizontal
boards shown extending across the doorway are
squeezed tightly against the two sides of the wall in
which the doorway is located by tighteningtwo loops
of cord, one near each side of the doorway. One loop
is illustrated. A cord is first tightened around the two
horizontal boards. Then the looped cord is further
tightened by binding it in the center with another
cord. as illustrated.
Two large "C"clamps serve even better than two
looped cords. However, secure support for a
swinging KAP still requires the use of a vertical
support board on each side of the doorway, as
illustrated. .
STEEL DOOR
FRAME
CONCRETE
WALL
;~, -:
DRNL DWG72·6364
Fig. 28.ORNL DWG 72-66'7
• You have enough low-resistance filters (such as
fiberglass dust filters used in furnaces and air-
conditioners) and other materials for building the
necessary large, supported filter in front of your
KAP.
• Your KAP can pump an adequate volume ofair
through the filter and shelter.
• The filter is installed so that it can be easily
removed if shelter temperatures rise too high.
H. Using Air Filters
To supply shelter occupants with filtered air
usually would be of much less importance to their
survival and health than to provide them with
adequate volumes of outdoor air to maintain
tolerable temperatures. However, filtering the
entering air could prove worthwhile, provided:
• Your shelter is not in an area likely to be
subjected to blast, or it is a blast shelter with blast
doors and blast valves protecting everything inside.
• Work on filters is started after you have
completed more essential work, including the
building of a high-protection-factor shelter, making,
installing,and testing the necessary numberof KAPs,
storing. adequate water, making a homemade fallout
meter, etc.
VERTICAL SUPPORT BOARD
EXTENDING DOWN TO FLOOR
--------- BOARD THE SAME THICKNESS
AS THE "FIXED" SUPPORT
BOARD OF THE KAP
Fig. 29.
"lI'""--r----- BOARD FORMING A 2-in-DEEP
BRACKET, WITH AN APPROX.
\!32'm. SHIM UNDER ITQUICKLY REMOVABLE
"FIXED" SUPPORT
FOR KAP
LOOPED CORD, TIGHTENED IN CENTER,
HOLDING BOARDS TIGHT AGAINST STEEL
DOOR FRAME.
Figure 29 shows a quick-removal bracket
supported by two horizontal boards tightened across
the upper part of a doorway by looped cords, as
described above. Also, study Fig. 19 and its
accompanying instructions.
G. Building More Durable KAPs
If you are building KAPs in normal times, you
may want to use materialsthat will makeyourpumps
last longer, even though these materials are more
.difficult to obtain and are more expensive.
Durability tests have shown that the KAP parts
that wear out first are the flaps and the pulleys. In6-ft
KAPs, the lower flaps are subject to hard use. Lower
flaps made of 6-oz (per sq.. yd), clear, nylon-
reinforced, plied vinyl have lasted undamaged for
over 1000 hours of full-stroke pumping, without
having their edges reinforced. Lowerflaps made of6-
mil nylon-reinforced polyethylene, without edge
reinforcements, have lasted for 1000hours with only
minor damage.
To prevent a filter used with a KAP from
causing too greata reduction in the volume ofair that
the KAP can pump through your shelter, you must
use large areas of low-resistance filter material. An
example: In one ventilation test, a large basement
shelter was used which had two ordinarydoorways at
its oppositeends. These served as itsair-intakeand its
air-exhaust openings. A 72X 29in. KAP operating in
one doorway pumped almost 5000 cubic feet per
minute through the shelter. But when a filter frame
holding 26 square feet of l-in-thick fiberglass dust
filters was placed across the air-intake stairwell, the
KAP could pump only about 3400 cfm through this
filter and the shelter.
The best pulley tested was a marine pulley such
as that used on small sailboats, with a Delrin
(DuPont) 2-in.-diameter wheel and J/win. stainless
steel shaft. This pulley was undamaged after
operating a 6-ft KAP for 324 hours. The pulley
appeared to be good for hundr~ds of hours offurther
operation.
The best pulley-cords tested were of braided
dacron or nylon.APPENDIX C
A HOMEMADE FALLOUT METER, THE KFM
HOW TO MAKE AND USE IT
FOLLOWING THESE INSTRUCTIONS MAY SAVE YOUR LIFE
z
~z
CIl
'J
~
-
The complete KFM instructions include patterns to be cut out and used to construct the fallout
meter. At the end of the instructions are extra patterns on 4 unnumbered pages. The reader is
urged to use these extra patterns to make KFM''s in normal peacetime and to keep the complete
instructions intact for use during a recognized crisis period.
If Xerox copies of the patterns are used, they should be checked against the originals in
order to make sure that they are the same size as the originals. Some older copiers make
copies with slightly enlarged dimensions. Even slightly enlarged copies of all the KFM
patterns can be made satisfactory provided: (1) on the PAPER PATTERN TO WRAP
AROUND KFM CAN, the distances between the 4 marks for the HOLES FOR STOP-
THREAD are corrected; and (2) the dimensions of the FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN are
corrected.
These instructions, including the heading on this page and the illustrative photos, can be photographed
without additional screening and rapidly reproduced by a newspaper or printer. If you keep the KFM
instructions intact, during a worsening crisis you will be able to use them to help your friends and
thousands of your fellow citizens by making them available for reproduction. tv
--<.,;JoCJo.....J
-..-
-
0)
a..I. The Need for Accurate and Dependable Fallout Meters
Ifa nuclear war ever strikes the United States, survivors of the blast and fire effects
would needto havereliablemeans of knowing whenthe radiation intheenvironment
around their shelters had dropped enough to let them venture safely outside. Civil
defense teams could use broadcasts of surviving radio stations to give listeners a
general idea of the fallout radiation in some broadcast areas. However, the fallout
radiation can vary widelyfrom point to point and the measurements are likelyto be
made too far from most shelters to make them accurate enough to use safely.
Therefore, each shelter should have some dependable method of measuring the
changing radiation dangers in its own area.
During a possible rapidly worsening nuclear crisis, or after a nuclear attack, most
unprepared Americans could not buy or otherwise obtain a fallout meter -- an
instrument that would greatly improve their chances ofsurvivinga nuclear war. The
fact that the dangers from fallout radiation- bestexpressed interms ofthe radiation
dose rate, roentgens per hour (RI hr) -- quite rapidly decrease during the first few
days, and then decrease more and more slowly, makes it very important to have a
fallout metercapable ofaccurately measuring the unseen, unfeltand changing fallout
dangers. Occupants ofafallout shelter should beable to minimizethe radiationdoses
they receive. In order to effectively minimize the radiation doses, a dependable
measuring instrument isneeded to determine the doses they receivewhilethey are in
the shelter and while they are outside for emergency tasks, such as going out to get
badly needed water. Also, such an instrument would permit them to determine when
it is safe to leavethe shelter for good.
Untrainedfamilies,guided only bythese written instructionsand using onlylowcost
materials and tools found inmost homes, have beenable to make a KFM byworking
3 or 4 hours. Bystudying the operating sections of these instructions for about IV2
hours, average untrained familieshave beenable to successfullyusethisfallout meter
to measure dose rates and to calculate radiation doses received, permissible times of
exposure, etc.
The KFM (Kearny Fallout Meter) was developed at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. It is understandable, easily repairable, and as accurate as most civil
defense fallout meters. In the United States in 1986 the least expensive
commercially available dose-rate meter that is accurate and dependable
and that measures high enough dose rates for wartime use is a British
instrumentthatretailsfor $375. ComparableAmericaninstruments retail
for over $1000.
Beforea nuclear attack occurs is the best time to build, test and learn how to use a
KFM. However, this instrument isso simple that itcould be made evenafter fallout
arrives provided that all the materials and tools needed (seelistsgivenin Sections V,
VI, and VII) and a copy of these instructions have been carried into the shelter.
II. Survival WorkPriorities During a Crisis
Before building a KFM, persons expecting a nuclear attack within a few hO,urs or
days and already inthe placewhere they intend to await attack should work with the
following priorities: (I) build or improve a high-protection-factorshelter (ifpossible,
ashelter covered with 2or 3feetofearthand separatefrom flammable buildings). At
the same time, make and install a KAP (a homemade shelter-ventilating pump) - if
instructions and materials are available. If not available, at least make a
DirectionalFan. Alsostore at least 15gallons ofwater for each shelter occupant-
ifcontainersare available. (2)Assembleall materials for one or two KFM s.(3)Make
and store the drying agent (byheating wallboard gypsum, as later described)for both
the KFM and its dry-bucket. (4) Complete at least one KFM.
III.Howto UseThese instructions to Best Advantage
I. Read ALOUD all of these instructions through Section VB, "Tools Needed,"
before doing anything else.
2. Next assemble all of the needed materials and tools.
3. Then read ALOUD ALL of each section following Section VIIbefore beginning
to make the part described in that section.
A FAMILY THAT FAILSTO READALOUD ALL OF EACH
SECTIONDESCRIBING HOW TO MAKEA PART. BEFORE
BEGINNING TO MAKE THAT PART. WILL MAKE AVOID-
ABLEMISTAKESANDWILL WASTETIME.
4. Have different workers. or pairs of workers. make the parts they are best
qualified to make. For example. a less skilled worker should start making the
drying agent (as described in Section VIII)before other workers start making
other parts. The most skilled worker should make and install the
aluminum-foil leaves (Sections Xand XI).
S. Give workers the sections of the instructions covering the parts they are to
build--so they can follow the step-by-step instructions. checking off with a
pencil each step as it is completed.
6. Discuss the problems that arise. The head of the family often can give better
answers if he first discusses the different possible interpretations of some
instructions with other family members, especiallyteenagers.
7, After completing one KFM and learning to use it. if time permits make a
second KFM--that should be a better instrument.
z
~:::0
c::
9ozen
~
~
N
tv
-",.0)
a..IV. What a KFM Is and How It Works
An electrostatic charge is transferred from a homemade electrostatic charging
device to the two aluminum-foil leaves of a KFM by means of its charging-wire.
The charging-wire extends out through the transparent plastic cover ofthe KFM.
tv
V1
zCI>
-l::0
C
Q
(5
zCI>
~
~w
TABLE USED TO FIND DOSE RATES IR/HRI
FROM KFM READINGS
·DIFFffffNCf 'fTWEEN THEIfEADING .EFOffE EXI'OSUltE
AND THE IffADING AFTEIf EX1'O$U1If 1.4"t Y $TAN(M"D·
FOIL LEAVES)
DIFF.OIN TIME INTERVAL OF AN EXPOSURE
READ· 1SSEC. 1MIN. 4 MIN. 1SMIN. 1HR.
INGS R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR
2mm 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.1 0.03
4mm 12. 3.1 0.8 0.2 0.06
6mm 19. 4.6 1.2 0.3 0.08
8mm 25. 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.10
10mm 31. 7.7 2.0 0.5 0.13
12mm 37. 9.2 2.3 0.6 0.15
14mm 43. 11. 2.7 0.7 0.18
2. exposing it to radiation for a specified
time in the location where measurement
of the dose rate is needed -- when
outdoors. positioningthe KFM about 3
ft. above the ground;
If a KFM is made and maintained with the specified dimensions and of the specified
materials. ITSACCURACY ISAUTOMATICALLY AND PERMANENTLY ESTAB-
LISHED BY UNCHANGING LAWS OF NATURE. Unlike factory made radiation
measuring instruments, A KFM NEVER NEEDS TO BECALIBRATED OR TESTED
WITH A RADIATION SOURCE. A KFM isused witha watch and the following table
that is based on numerous calibrations made at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
As will be fully explained later. the radiation dose rate is determined
by:
The millimeter scale is cut out and attached (see photo illustrations on the following
page) to the clear plastic cover of the KFM so that its zero mark is directly above the
two leaves in their discharged position when the KFM is resting on a horizontal
surface. A reading of the separation of the leaves is taken by noting the number of
millimeters that the lower edge ofone leafappears to be on. on one side of the zero
mark on the scale. and almost at the same time noting the number of millimeters
the lower edge of the other leafappears to be on. on the other side of the zero mark.
The sum of these two apparent positions of the lower edges of the two leaves is
called a KFM reading. The drawing appearing after the photo illustrations shows
the loweredges of the leaves of a KFM appearing to be 9 mm on the right of zero and
10on the left, giving a KFM reading of 19mm. (Usually the loweredges of the leaves
are not at the same distance from the zero mark.)
1. charging and reading the KFM before
exposure;
4. calculating. by subtraction. the difference between the reading taken before
exposure and the reading taken after exposure;
3. reading the KFM after its exposure;
Instructions on how to use a KFM are given after those detailing how to make and
charge this fallout meter.
S. using this table to find what the dose rate was during the exposure -- as will be
described later.
~
..
~::>..
...\
SCALE
CHAJIlGEDKFM
j
ELECTROSTATICALLY
CHARGED PLASTIC
OR TAPE
.,- SPARIl; GAP ~ CAN (COVER IS
NOT SHOWN)
A KFM isa simple electroscope-ionizationchamber
fallout meter with which fallout radiation can be mea-
sured accurately. To use a KFM, an electrostatic charge
must first be placed on its two separate aluminum-foil
leaves. These leaves are insulated by being suspended
separately on clean, dry insulating threads.
To take accurate readings. the air inside a KFM must
be kept very dry by means of drying agents such as
dehydrated gypsum (easily made by heating gypsum
wallboard. "sheetrock") or silica gel. (Do not use
calcium chloride or other saIt.) Pieces of drying agent
are placed on the bottom of the ionization chamber
(the housing can) of a KFM.
When the two KFM leavesare charged electrostatically, their likecharges (both positive
or both negative) cause them to be forced apart. When fallout gamma radiation (that is
similar to X rays but more energetic) strikes the air inside the ionization chamber of a
KFM. itproduces charged ions inthisenclosed air. Thesecharged ionscause part or allof
the electrostatic charge on the aluminum-foil leavesto bedischarged. Asa result of losing
charge. the two KFM leaves move closer together.
A KFM-maker who wants visual proof that his instrument can be partially or wholly
discharged by ionizing radiation should persuade his dentist to place the charged KFM
about 20 inches directly below a typical dental X-ray
machine. For example, when a typical 90 kvp machine was
set at 15 milliamps and for a 1/20th second pulse. its
columnated X-ray beam partially discharged the KFM's
separated aluminum-foil leaves. promptly reducing the
initial reading of 15mm to 9 mm. Other types of machines
willrequire different settings. Many dental X-ray machines
are not accurately calibrated, nor do they produce gamma
rays.sosuch tests should not beused inan attempt to check
the accuracy of a KFM.
CLEAR
I PL.ASTIC
To read the separation of the lower edges of the two ~.COVER
KFM leaves with one eye. look straight down on the SEAT
leaves and the scale on the clear plastic cover. Keep - ~c _::".
the reading eye 12 inches above the SEAT. The KFM ~,.- ..,.---c'
should be resting on a horizontal surface. To be sure the reading eye is always at
this exact distance. place the lower end of a 12·inch ruler on the SEAT, while the
upper end of the ruler touches the eyebrow above the reading eye. It is best to
hold the KFM can with one hand and the ruler with the other. Using a flashlight
makes the reading more accurate.C>o,
C>o,To get a clearer idea of the construction and use of a KFM, look carefully at the
following photos and read their captions.
IV
0-,
z
~::0
c::
Bozen
1
(ll
.,..
For accurate radiation
measurements, a KFM
should be placed on an
approximately horizontal
surface, but the charges
on its two leaves and
their displacements do
not have to be equal.
NOTE: In these photos, the paper scale is taped to the top of the
transparentplastic-filmcover. Itisbettertotapethe scaleto
the under side of the cover, where it is less likely to be
damaged.
D. Reading a KFM. A 12-
inch ruler rests on the
SEAT and is held vert-
ical, while the reader's
eyebrow touches the
upper end of the ruler.
The lower edge of the
right leaf is under 8 on
the scale and the lower
edge of the left leaf is
under 6 on the scale,
giving a KFM reading of
14.
Also note the SEAT, a
piece of pencil taped to
the right side of the can,
opposite the charging
wire. .
C. A Charged KFM. Note
the separation of the
upper edges of its two
leaves. The charging-
wire has been raised to
an almost horizontal pos-
ition so that its lower end
is too far above the alu-
minum leaves to permit
electrical leakage from
the leaves back up the
charging-wire and into
the outside air;
The high-voltage electro-
static charge on the un-
wound tape (that is an
insulator) jumps the
spark-gap between the
tape and the upper end of
the charging-wire, and
then flows down the
charging-wire to charge
the insulated aluminum-
foil leaves of the KFM.
(Since the upper edges of
the two leaves are ~ inch
below the scale and this
is a photo taken at an
angle, both leaves appear
to be under the right side
of the scale.)
A. An Uncharged KFM. The charging wire has been pulled to one side by its
adjustment-thread. This
photo was taken looking
straight down at the
upper edges of the two
flat, 8-ply aluminum
leaves. At this angle the
leaves are barely visible,
hanging vertically side by
side directly under the
zero mark, touching each
other and with their ends
even. Their suspension-
threads insulate the
leaves. These threads
are almost parallel and
touch (but do not cross)
each other where they
extend over the top of the
rim of the can.
B. Charging a KFM by a Spark-Gap Discharge from a Tape That Has Been
Electrostatically Charged by Being Unwound Quickly. Note that the charged
tape is moved so that its
surface is perpendicular
to the charging-wire.C\J
0)
o,
C\J
0)
a..INSTRUcnONS, Page 5
ORNL- DWG 7~-1l~8811t
217
.E
THREAD
t/.·jn. TAPE
AROUNO EDGE
OF SKIRT OF COVER
REMOVABLE TRANSPARENT COVER
AND CHARGING WIRE
JP
THREAD TIED TO
TOGGLE / TOGGLE (SMAll SLIVER
DETAIL I OF WOOD 3/, in. LONG)
;. TAPE TOGGLE TO
OUT$IDE OF CAN
-STOP-
THREAD
ANHYDRITE
CaS04
'"----- INSIDE OIAM 2 9/t6 in. ----_
! I !
1 INCH
TOP VIEW
(COVER AND CHARGINGWIRE NOT SHOWNI
TRANSPARENT PLASTIC COVER
(DETAILS ON LEFT!
l
BOTTOM OF CAN
(This is !!2! a Full Scale Drawing).Pg 2 - (8)V. Materials Needed
A. "or the K/-M: (In the lollowlllg list. when more than one alternative material is gi\en. the best
material is listed first.)
I. Any type metal can. approximately 2-9 Ih inches indiameter insideand 2-7 Xinches high inside.
washed dean with soap. (This is the sile of a standard X-ounce can. Since most soup cans. pop
cans. and beer cans also arc about 2-9/ Ih inches in diameter inside. the required si/e of can also
can be made bycutting down the height of more widelyavailable cans as described in Section
IX of these instructions.)
2. Standard aluminum foil - 2 square feet. (In 1987.2 square feet of widely sold U.S.
brands of aluminum foil weighed between 8.0 and 8.5 grams. One gram equals 0.035
ounce.) (If only "Heavy Duty" or "Extra Heavy Duty" aluminum foil isavailable. make 5-ply
leaves rather than S-ply leaves of standard foil: the resultant fallout meter will be almost as
accurate.)
3. Doorbell-wire. or other light insulated wire (preferably but not necessarily a single-strand wire
inside the insulation h inches.
4. Any type of clean, fine thread that has not been anti-static treated will serve to
suspend a KFM's leaves. (Almost all kinds of sewing thread and fly-tying thread
manufactured in 1987 are anti-static treated. are poor insulators. and are unsatis-
Iactory.) In 1987 the best widely available excellent insulating thread is unwaxed
dental floss: floss is not anti-static treated. Most unwaxed dental floss is too thick and
stiff for properly suspending KFM leaves. but. since dental floss is not a twisted
thread. Y9u can make flexible strand-threads from it. Make each no more than one-
quarter as thick as the floss. and about 12 inches long. First separate several strands
at the end of the floss outside its dispenser. Then separate strands while pulling one
wayan the end of the strand-thread that you want and the other way on the unwanted
strands. Use only a clean needle to touch and separate the strands in the middle 6
inches of the 12-inch-long piece of unwaxed dental floss.
A widely sold dental floss. Johnson and Johnson's Extra Fine Unwaxed. drawn outof
its dispenser without splitting it. makes quite satisfactory leaf-supporting threads.
However. better leaf-supporting threads can be made by first separating any dental
floss into thinner. more flexible threads.
Very thin monofilament fishing line or leader is an excellent insulator. The 2-pound-
test strength. such as Du Pont's "Stren" monofilament fishing line. is best. "Trilene"
2-pound "nylon leader." a monofilament manufactured by Berkley and Company.
also is excellent. (A 4-pound monofilament line will serve. but is disadvantageously
stiff.) Some modern monofilament lines or leaders such as "Trilene" contain an
additive that makes them pliant. but also makes them poorer insulators for the first
several hours after being taken out of their dispenser and used to suspend the leaves
of a KFM. However. in about6 hours the silica gel or anhydrite dryingagent in a KFM
removes this additive and the monofilament becomes as good an insulator as even
strands of unwaxed dental floss.
To minimize thechance of usinga piece of monofilamentorotherthread thathasbeen
soiled and thus changed into a poor insulator. always first remove and discard the
outermost layer of threadon any spool thathas notbeen kept clean in a plastic bagor
other packaging after being initially unwrapped.
During a worsening crisis or after an attack. neither thread that has not been anti-
static treated. nor unwaxed dental floss. nor clean 2-pound or 4-pound monofilament
line may be available. However. most American homes have an excellent insulator.
very thin polyethylene film - especially clean dry cleaners' bags. A narrow
insulatingstripcutonly 1/16inch wide can be usedto suspendeach KFM leaf. instead
of an insulatingthread. (Installedleaves suspended on strips of thin plasticfilm must
be handled with care.)
To cut 1/ 16-inch-widestrips from verythin polyethylenefilm. first cut a pieceabout6
x 10 inches. Tape only the two 6-inch-wide ends to a piece of paper (such as a brown
grocery bag). so that the film is held flat and smooth on the paper. Make 10 marks.
1/ 16-inchapart. oneach of the two tapes that are holdingthe film. Place a light so that
its reflection onthe film enables you to see the edge of the film thatyou are preparing
to cut. Then use a very sharp. clean knife or clean razor blade. guided by the edge of a
firmly held ruler. to cut 9 strips. of which you will select the best two. When cutting.
hold the knife almost horizontal, with the plane of its blade perpendicular to the
taped-down film. Throughout this procedure avoid touching the center parts of the
strips.
5. A piece of clear plastic film - a 6 x 6 inch square. Clear vinyl (4 mils thick) used for
storm-proofing windows is best. butany reasonably stoutand clear plastic will serve.
The strong clear plastic used to wrap pieces of cheese. if washed with hot water and
soap. is good. Do not use weak plastic orcellophane. plastic film made from cellulose
(such as Flex-a-Pane) and roasting bags are too permeable to water vapor.
h. Cloth duct tape ("silver tape"). or masking tape. or freezer tape. or Scotch-type tape
-about 10 square inches. (A roll of Scotch Magic Transparent Tape. if available.
should be saved for use in charging the KFM).
7. Band-Aid tape. or masking tape, or'freezer tape. or Scotch transparent tape, or other thin and
very flexible tapes about 2 square inches.
X. Gypsum wallboard (sheetrock) about I 2square foot, best about 1/2 inch thick, for a good
homemade drying agent. (Silica gel with dark blue color indicator is an even better
drying agent. but is not available in most communities. Available from chemical
supply firms that supply high school chemistry classes. With dark blue silica gel in
the bottom of a KFM. white typing correction fluid or white ink is needed to make the
lower edges of a KFM's aluminum leaves easier to see.)
9. Glue not essential. but useful to replace Band-Aid and other thin tapes. "One hour"epoxy is
best. Model airplane cement is satisfactory.
10. An ordinary wooden pencil and a small toothpick (or split a small sliver of wood.)
II. Two strong rubber bands. or string.
12. Several small, transparent plastie bags. such as sandwich bags, to cover the KFM when it is
exposed where fallout particles may get on it and contaminate it. Or pieces of thin. transparent
plastic film. such as that from bread bags. Also small rubber bands. or string.
B. For the Charging Devices:
I. Most hard plastic rubbed on dry paper. This is the best method.
a. Plexiglas and most other hard plastics. such as are used in draftsmen's triangles. common
smooth plastic rulers, etc. - at least 6 inches long.
b. Dry paper ~- Tough paper, such as clean, strong grocery-bag or typing paper. Tissue paper,
newspaper. or facial tissue such as Kleenex. or toilet paper are satisfactory for charging. but
not as durable.
2. Scotch Magic Transparent Tape (3/4 inch width is best). or Scotch Transparent Tape, or P.V.e.
(Polyvinyl chloride) insulating electriealtapes, or a few of the other common brands of Scotch-
type tapes. (Some plastic tapes do not develop sufficiently high-voltageelectrostatic charges when
unrolled quickly.) This method cannot be used for charging a KFM inside a dry-bucket. needed
for charging when the air is very humid.
e. For Determining Dose Rates and Recording Doses Received:
I. A watch with a second hand.
2. A flashlight or other light, for reading the KFM in a dark shelter or at night.
3. Pencil and paper - preferably a notebook.
D. For the Dry-Bucket: A KFM must becharged inside a dry-bucket ifthe air isvery humid, as it often
isinside acrowded, long-occupied shelter lackll1gadequate forced venulatton.)
. I. A large bucket, pot, or can, preferably with a top diameter of at least II inches.
2. Clear plastic (best is 4-mil-thick clear plastic used for storm windows). A square piece 5 inches
wider on a side than the diameter of the bucket to be used.
3. Cloth duct tape. one inch wide and 8 feet long (or 4 ft., if2 inches wide). Or 16ft. offreezer tape
one inch wide.
ztr:
-1
;;0
C
nj
oz
,Vl
;;,0
~
0'-
N
-00Ieo
0>
0..Small nail - sharpened
Stick, or a wooden tool handle
(best 2-2\;1 inch diameter and at least 12inches long)
Hammer
Pliers
Scissors
Needle - quite a large sewing needle, but less than 2\;1 inches long
Knife with a small blade - sharp
Ruler (12 inches)
Desirable but not essential tools: a file and
a fine-toothed hacksaw blade.
4. Twoplastic bags 14to 16inches in circumference, such as ordinary plastic
bread bags. The original length of these bags should be at least 5 inches
greater than the height ofthe bucket.
S. About one square foot of wall board (sheetrock), to make anhydrite drying
agent.
6. Two I-quart Mason jars or other airtight containers, one in which to store
anhydrite and another inwhich to keep dry the KFM charging devices.
7. Strong rubber bands .. enough to make a loop around the bucket. Or
string.
d. Heat allofthese filled "bowls" ofgypsum in hottestoven for one hour.
Ifsufficientaluminumfoiland time are available, it is best to heat the gypsum
and store the anhydrite as follows:
N
-\0
zVl...,
:;cI
e
Q
<5zSIl
1
~
-..j
VIII. Make the Drying Agent
--The Easiest Part to Make, but Time Consuming .-
For a KFM to measure radiation accurately, the air inside its ionization
chamber must be kept very dry. An excellent drying agent (anhydrite) can be
made by heating the gypsum in ordinary gypsum wallboard (sheetrock). Do
NOTuse calcium chloride.
Take a piece of gypsum wallboard approximately 12 inches by 6 inches, and
preferablywith its gypsum about 3/8 inches thick. Cut offthe paper and glue,
easiest done by first wetting the paper. [Since water vapo~ from normal air
penetrates the plastic cover ofa KFM and can dampen the anhydrite and make
it ineffective in as shorta time as two days, fresh batches of anhydrite must be
made before the attack and kept ready inside the shelter for replacement. The
useful life of the drying agent inside a KFM can be greatly lengthened by
keeping the KFM inside an .airtight container (such as a peanut butterjar with
a 4-inch-diameter mouth) with some drying agent, when the KFM is not being
used.]
Break the white gypsum filling into small pieces and make the
largest no more than 112 in. across. (The tops of pieces larger
than this may be too close to the aluminum foil leaves.) If the
gypsum is dry, using a pair of pliers makes breaking it easier.
Make the largestside ofthe largest pieces nobiggerthan this.
Dry gypsum is not a drying agent. To drive the water out of the gy~sum
molecules and produce the drying agent (anhydrite), heat the gypsum In an
oven at its highest temperature (which should be above 400 degrees F) fo~ one
hour. Heat the gypsum after placing the small pieces no more than two pieces
deep in a pan. Or heat the pieces over a fire for 20 minutes or more in a pan or
can heated to a dull red.
a. So that the right amount of anhydrite can be taken quickly out of its
storagejar, put enough pieces of gypsum in a can with the same diameter
as the KFM, measuring out a batch of gypsum that almost covers the
bottom ofthe can with a single layer.
b. Cut a piece of aluminum foil about 8 in. x 8 in. square, and fold up its
edges to form a bowl-like container in which to heat one batch of gypsum
pieces.
Measure out 10or 12such batches, and puteach batch in its aluminum foil
"bowl."
c.
1.
2.
3.
4.
S.
VI. Useful but not Essential Materials
--Which Could be Obtained Before a Crisis--
VII. Tools Needed
Anairtight container (such as a large peanut butter jar) with a mouth at least 4
inches wide, inwhich to keep a KFM, along with some drying agent, when it is
not being used. Keeping a KFM very dry greatly extends the time during
which the drying agent inside the KFM remains effective.
Commercial anhydrite with a color indicator, such as the drying agent Drierite.
This granular form of anhydrite remains light blue as long as it iseffectiveas a
dryingagent; itturns pink when it becomes ineffective. Oruse silicagel with
color indicator, that is dark blue when effective and that turns light
pink when it becomes ineffective. Heating in a hot oven or in a can
over a fire reactivates them as drying agents and restores their blue
color. Obtainable from laboratory supply sources. Use enough to
cover the bottom of the KFM's can no more than 1/2 inch deep.
Four square feet of aluminum foil, to make a moisture-proof cover for the
dry-bucket.
3.
2.
1.I
('t)
C)
a..
I
('t)
C)
a.Since anhydrite absorbs water from the air very rapidly, quickly put it in a dry
airtight container while it is still quite hot. AMason jar is excellent.
To place anhydrite in a KFM, drop in the pieces one by one, being careful not
to hit the leaves or the stop-threads. The pieces should almost cover the
bottom of the can, with no piece on top of other pieces.
To remove anhydrite from a KFM, use a pair of scissors or tweezers as
forceps, holding them in a vertical position and not touching the leaves.
IX. Make the Ionization Chamberof the KFM
(ToAvoidMistakes and Save Time,
Read AllofThis Section ALOUDBefore Beginning Work.)
Remove the paper label (ifany) from an ordinary 8-ounce can from which the
top has been smoothly cut. Wash the can with soap and water and dry it. (An
8-ounce can has an inside diameter ofabout 2-9/16inches and an inside height
ofabout2-7/8 inches.)
Skipto step 3if an 8-ounce can is available. If an 8-ounce can is not available,
reduce the height of any other can having an inside diameter of about 2-9/16
inches (such as most soup cans, most pop cans, or most beer cans). To cut off
the top part ofa can, first measure and mark the line on which to cut. Then to
keep from bending the can while cutting, wrap newspaper tightly around a
stick or a round wooden tool handle, so that the wood is covered with 20 to 30
thicknesses of paper and the diameter (ideally) is only slightly less than the
diameterofthe can.
One person should hold the can over the paper-covered stick while a second
person cuts the can little by little along the marked cutting line. If leather
gloves are available, wear them. Tocut the can off smoothly, use a file, or use
a hacksaw drawn backwards along the cutting line. Or cut the can with a
.sharp, short blade of a pocketknife by: (1) repeatedly stabbing downward
vertically through the can into the paper, and (2)repeatedly making a cut about
1/4 inch long by moving the knife into a sloping position, while keeping its
point still pressed into the papercovering the stick.
Next, smooth the cut edge, and cover it with small pieces of freezer tape or
otherflexible tape.
3. Cut out the PAPER PATTERN TO WRAP AROUND KFM CAN. (Cut
one pattern out of Pattern Page A.) GIue (ortape) this pattern to the can,
starting with one of the two short sides of the pattern. Secure this starting
short side directly over the side seam of the can. Wrap the pattern snugly
around the can, gluing or taping it securely as it is being wrapped. (If the
pattern istoo wide to fit flat between the rims of the can, trim a little off its
lower edge.)
4. Sharpen a small nail, by filing,or rubbing on concrete, for use as a punch
to make the four holes needed to install the stop-threads in the ionization
chamber (the can). (The stop-threads are insulators that stop the
charged aluminum leaves from touching the can and being discharged.)
IVIVo
Zen>-l
~
c:
~SZen
;pog
00
END
OF
STICK
PUNCH SMALL
HOLE WITH,
SHARPENED
SMALL NAIL ~
ENDOF STICK
ORWOODEN
HANDLE INSIDE
CAN
STOP-
THREAD
THREAD ----....
CONTINUES -,
TO NEEDLE I TOGGLE
SMALL ~ THISSMALL,
TOGGLE TIED ABOUT
TIED TO 1/2 in.FROM
END OF TOP CAN;LATER
THREAD VIEW THREAD IS
OF PULLED
CAN TIGHT AND
TAPEDTO
SIDEOF CAN
STOP-
THREAD
SINGLE THREAD THREADED THROUGH 4HOLES
TO MAKE 2 STOP·THREADS
The stop-threads can be
installed by using a needle
to thread a single thread
through all four holes. Use
a very clean thread, prefer-
ably nylon, and do not touch
the parts of this thread that
will be inside the can and
will serve as the insulating
stop-threads. Soiled threads
are poor insulators.
(See illustrations.)
Have one person hold the
can over a horizontal stick or
a round wooden tool-handle,
that ideally has a diameter
about' as large as the dia-
meter of the can. Then a
second person can use the
sharpened nail and a ham-
mer to punch four very small
holes through the sides of
the can at the points shown
by the four crosses on the
pattern. Make these holes
just large enough to run a
needle through them, and
then move the needle in the
holes so as to bend back the
obstructing points of metal.
s.
6.
As soon as the aluminum foil is cool enough to touch, fold and crumple
the edges of each aluminum foil "bowl" together, to make a rough
aluminum-covered "ball" of each batch of anhydrite.
Promptly seal the batches in airtight jars or other airtight containers, and
keep containers closed except when taking out an aluminum-covered
"ball."
f.
e.
7.
6.
8.
1.
2.,
q-
Cl
0..z
~c::
~:n
Zl'
\0
llJ
~.....
(.:)
s.....
<{
....::>
(.)
C!: llJ
~ ~
I.i.. .....
o (.:)
~ C!:
<{ 0llJ .....
II) <{
llJ ....o ::>iii (.)
/
BOTTOM OF CAN (ABOVE LIP)
+ ~
" - - HOLES FOR STOP·THREAD ~
" TOP OF CAN (BELOW LIP)
~ FASTEN THREADS HOLDING ALUMINUM LEAVES HERE
I ....... TOP OF HN. PENCIL (FOR RULER REST)
I::!~I'- SEATU::JZUwwll.en
J:OUWZll.
:::~L-
I
~
-.J
Cl:
~
~
I
--k:
HOLE
FOR
STOP·
THREAD
CUT EXACTL Y ON SIDE LINES"
TABLE USED TO FIND DOSE RATES (R/HR)
FROM KFM READINGS
'DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE READING BEFORE EXPOSURE
AND THE READING AFTER EXPOSURE IB·I'L Y STANDARD·
FOIL LEA VES)
CUT EXACTL Y ON SIDE LINES
DIFF.*IN TIME INTERVAL OF AN EXPOSURE
J- READ· 15SEC. 1MIN. 4MIN. 16MIN. 1 HR.
/1 INGS R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR
2 mm 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.1 0.03
4 mm 12. 3.1 0.8 0.2 0.06
6 mm 19. 4.6 1.2 0.3 0.08
8 mm 25. 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.10
10 mm 31. 7.7 2.0 0.5 0.13
12 mm 37. 9.2 2.3 0.6 0.15
14 mm 43; 11. 2.7 0.7 0.18
c,
wOCDI-
OS:-10::J-IOWJ:CDen .
en Z
w;;;-1_OLDJ:":'
HOLE
FOR
STOP·
THREAD
~ TOP OF CAN (BELOW LIP) /
e,
wO FASTEN THREADS HOLDING ALUMINUM LEAVES HERECDI-
OS: --.!..-.......TOP OF HN. PENCIL (FOR RULER REST)-10::J-IOw -I w
'- SEATf J:CD TABLE USED TO FIND DOSE RATES (R/HR) _II:en U::JC!: en z FROM KFM READINGS ZU C!:
~
w- 'DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE READING BEFORE EXPOSURE WW ~-I~ Q.en
I.i.. OLD AND THE READING AFTER EXPOSURE IB·I'L YSTANDARD· J:OJ:":' FOIL LEAVES) I.i..
0 UW 0
~ fi-DIFF.*IN TIME INTERVAL OF AN EXPOSURE Zll.
~
~ READ· 15SEC. 1MIN. 4MIN. 16MIN. 1 HR. --k: :::~ + ~ ~INGS -II) R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR
I " - - HOLES FOR STOP·THREAD ~
II)
llJ HOLE 2 mm 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.1 0.03 HOLE llJ0 0
iii FOR 4mm 12. 3.1 0.8 0.2 0.06 FOR llJ iii~STOP· 6mm 19. 4.6 1.2 0.3 0.08 STOP· -.J
THREAD 8mm 25. 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.10 THREAD Cl:
10mm 31. 7.7 2.0 0.5 0.13 ~C!:12mm 37. 9.2 2.3 0.6 0.15 llJ
14mm 43. 11. 2.7 0.7 0.18 Y BOTTOM OF CAN (ABOVE LIP)
I
llJ C!:
~~
..... I.i..
(.:)0
~ ~
..... <{
<{ llJ
.... II)
::>llJ(.) 0iii
llJ
~.....
(.:)
~.....
<{
....::>
(.)
PAPER PATTERN TO WRAP AROUND KFM CAN (GLUE OR TAPE SECURELY TO CAN)
CUT OUT THESE PATTERNS, EACH OF WHICH IS THE EXACT SIZE FOR A KFM.
PATTERN PAGE (A) CAUTION: XEROX COPIES OF THESE PATTERNS MAY BE TOO LARGE.
tvtvI
LO
C)
a..X.Make TwoSeparate 8-P1y Leaves ofStaaclard
[NotHeavy Duty·] AllUDlnam FoB
4. Fold this 4-ply sheet to make an 8-ply sheet (8 sheets thick) approximately 2
inches by 2 inches, being sure that the two halves of the second-fold edge are
exactly together. This third folding makes an 8-ply aluminum foil sheet with
one comereucdy square.
Ztil..,
:;l:l
c:
~5:2
Yl
'J
IQ
o
-oTHREAD l.INE
;06"
-to"Q
1.+\,.0-
ULY LEAF WITH tTlc»f.M EDGE
FOLDEDTOVEfIITICALPOIfITIOH
THE
SQUARE
CORNER
OF 8-PLY
SHEET
THREAD
LINE
7. While holding a straight edge
along the THREAD LINE of the
pattern, press with a sharp pencil
so as to make a shallow groove for
the THREAD LINE on the 8-ply
aluminum sheet. Also using a
sharp pencil, trace around the top
and side of the pattern, so as to
indent (groove) the 8-plyfoil.
8. Remove the pattern and cut out the
8-ply aluminum foil leaf. Then, in
order to prevent possible excessive
electricaldischargefrom overlysharp
pointsonthelowercornersoftheleaf,
cutabout 1/16-inch(~ )offeachofits
two lower.corners.
9. While holding a straight edge along
theindented THREAD LINE, liftup
the OPEN EDGE of the 8-plysheet
(keepinga1l8pliestogether)untilthis
edgeisvertical,asillustrated.Remove
the straight edge, and fold the 8-ply
aluminumalongtheTHREAD LINE
so as to make aflat-folded hem.
10. Open the flat-folded hem of the fin-
ishedleafuntil the8-plyleafisalmost
flat again, as shown by the pattern,
from which the FINISHED-LEAF
PATTERN has already beencut.
II. Prepare to attach the aluminum-foil
leafto the thread that willsuspend it
insidethe KFM.
.E
N
Xoa:
Q.
~
APPROX. 2 in.
8-PLY
SHEET
V
THE SQUARE
CORNER
THIRD-FOLD EDGE
Proceed as follows to make each leaf:
1. Cut out a piece of standard aluminum
foilapproximately 4 inches by 8 inches.
2. Fold the aluminum foil to make a 2-ply
(= 2 thicknesses) sheet approximately 4
inches by 4 inches.
3. Fold this 2-ply sheet to make a 4-ply
sheet approximately 2 inches by 4
inches.
Before threading the thread through the four holes, tie a small toggle (see the
preceding sketch) to the long end of the thread. (This toggle can easily be made
of a very small sliver of wood cut about 3/8 in. long.) After the thread has been
pulled through the four holes, attach a second toggle to the thread, about 112inch
from the part of the thread that comes out of the fourth hole. Then the thread can
be pulled tightly down the side of the can and the second small toggle can be
taped securely in place to the side of the can. (If the thread is taped down without
a toggle, it is likely to move under the tape.)
The first toggle and all of the four holes also should be covered with tape, to
prevent air from leaking into the can after it has been covered and is being used
as an ionization chamber.
S. Cut out the FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN, found on the following Pattern Page
B. Note that this pattern is NOTa square and that it is smaller than the 8-ply
sheet. Flatten the 8 thicknesses of aluminum foil with the fingers until they
appear to be a single thin, flat sheet.
6. Hold the FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN on top of the 8-ply aluminum foil
sheet, with the pattern's THIRD-FOLDEDGE on top of the third-fold edge of
the 8-ply aluminum sheet. Be sure that one lower comer of the
FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN is on top of the exacdy square comer of the
8-ply aluminum sheet.
.If only heavy duty aluminum foil (sometimes called "extra heavy duty") is
available, make S-plyleaves of the same size, and use the table for the 8-ply KFM
to determine radiation dose rates. To make a S-ply leaf, start by cutting out a
piece of foil approximately 4 inches by 4 inches. Fold it to make a 4-ply sheet
approximately 2 inches by 2 inches, with one corner exactly square. Next from a
single thickness of foil cut a square approximately 2 inches by 2 inches. Slip this
square into a 4-ply sheet, thus making a S-ply sheet. Then make the S-ply leaf,
using the FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN, etc. as described for making an 8-ply leaf.
NNNIv
0>a,223
INSTRUCTIONS, Page 11
PATTERN FOR CLEAR-PLASTIC COVER FOR KFM CAN
SHORT SIDE
~liJ
~ ~1- 1 ::::,.
POSITION TO ATTACH ~l:o=(
THE PAPER SCALE TO liJ ':j
THE COVER OF CAN, ~ ~
PERPENDICULAR TO cc 1-_
THE KFM LEAVES ~ IliJ <, "-
/ <: ~ "-
/ liJ 1-~~'-> v
/ ~\
0\
I ~\I ~
\ ~J
\ . HOLE FOR §I
\ CHARGING- . ~/
"WIRE" 4--r ~Q:-o/~~. ~V'
<, 012 in./
<, ----- ,
OPEN EDGE
L.U
c
(/')
oZ
o
~
THREAD LINE
a·PLY LEAF
THI RD-FOLD EDGE
CUT ALONG __
ENDSOF MARKS 11111111111111111111111111111/1111111111111111111
ALSO CUT ON __ 2015 10 5 0 5 10 15 20
THIS LINE
CUT ALONG
ENDSOF MARKS-- 11111I11I/111I/1l1I/IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIJlIII
ALSO CUT ON __ 201510 5 0 5 101520
THIS LINE
FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN
JT OUT EXACTLY ON SIDE LINES) PAPER SCALE (TO BE CUT OUT)
PATTERN PAGE (B)
CAUTION: XEROX COPIES OF THE FINISHED-LEAF AND THE
SCALE PATTERNS MAY BE SLIGHTLYTOO LARGE-Pg 5 - (18)tv
~
z
Vl...,
:::0
c:(j...,
(5
Z
Vl
N
o
8-oz.CAN
I
I
I
LEAF·
Irrl SUSPENDING
I :..--- THREAD -_-+ ----'''I \
1 THREAD ON I \
I OUTSIDE I HEM ON
I OF CAN ) ~OUTSIDE
II 5 PIECES OF OF LEAF
I 1/8 IN. x 1/4 IN
q... r----- BAND·AID TAPE.c:::::r:..---,
I ON EACH LEAF
'- TAPE STUCK TO
\ END OF THREAD
\ AND LATER TO CAN
ALUMINUM·
FOIL LEAF
SIDE VIEW
8-PLY LEAF
END VIEW
SHOWING THETWOLEAVESCHARGED ;;,0CJO
(WHEN NOTCHARGED. THE LEAVESHANG ~
PERPENDICULAR ANDTOUCHING.I
To prevent possible partial discharge from overly sharp lower corners of
the leaves, use scissors to cut about 1/16 inch ( .. ) offeach lower corner of
the twoleaves. (Partialdischargefrom an overlysharpcornermayprevent
a KRM's leavesfrom beingadequatelychargedand adequatelyseparated.)
To make it easier to take .accurate readings:
a. Make a black stripe 1/8-inch wide on the hem side of the lower edge of
each leaf, if the drying agent to be used is white anhydrite made from
gypsum,orlightblueDrterite,Itis besttouse a waterproofmarker. such
as black Marko by Flair.
b. ~ak~ a white stripe, ifthe drying agenttobe used isdarkblue silicagel.
LIqUId Paper correction fluid, or white ink, serves well.
*If using epoxy or other glue, use only a very little to hold down the hem, to
attach the thread securely to the leaf and to glue together any open edges of the
plied foil. Most convenient is "one hour" epoxy, applied with a toothpick. Model
airplane cement requires hours to harden when applied between sheets of
aluminum foil. To make sure no glue stiffens the free thread beyond the upper
.corners ofthe finished leaf, put no glue within 1/4 inch of a point where thread will
go out from the folded hem ofthe leaf.
The instructions in step 11 are for persons lacking "one hour" epoxy or the time
required to dry other types of glue. Persons using glue instead of tape to attach the
leaf to its thread should make appropriate use of the pattern on the following page
and ofsome ofthe procedures detailed in steps 12through 18.
18. Cut 5 pieces of Band-Aid tape, each approximately
1/8 inch by 1/4 inch, this small.
Use 2 of these pieces of tape to secure the centers of the side edges of the leaf.
Place the 5 pieces as illustrated in the SIDE VIEW sketch below. Or use tiny
droplets of epoxy, applied with a needle, to securethe sideedges andto
hold down the hem. ORNL DWG 766542
19.
20.
I \
1\I \
I \I 'r-----.JI (
I
I
I
~IICut out Pattern (C), the guide sheet used when attaching a leaf to its
suspending thread, Then tape Pattern (C) to the top of a work table.
Cover the two "TAPE HERE" rectangles on Pattern (C) with pieces of
tape, each piece the size of the rectangle. Then cut two other pieces of
tape each the same size and use them to tape the thread ONTO the guide
sheet, on top of the "TAPE HERE" rectangles.
Be very careful not to touch the two l-inch parts of the thread next to the
outline of the finished leaf. since oil and dirt even on clean fingers will
reduce the electrical insulating value of the thread between the leaf and
the top rim of the can.
If no epoxy glue· is available to hold down the hem and prevent the
thread from slipping in the hem, cut two pieces of tape (Band-Aid tape is
best; next best is masking or freezer tape; next best, Scotch tape). After
first peeling off the paper backing of Band-Aid tape, cut each piece of
tape 1/8 inch by I inch long. Attach these two pieces of tape to the
finished 8-ply aluminum leaf with the sticky sides up, except for their
ends. As shown by the pattern on the following pattern page, secure 118
inch of one end of a tape strip near one corner of the 8-ply aluminum foil
leaf by first turning under this 1I8-inch end; that is, with this end's
sticky side down. Then turn under the other 1I8-inch-long end, and
attach this end below the THREAD LINE. Slant each tape strip as
illustrated on Pattern (C).
13. With the thread still taped to the paper pattern and while slightly lifting
the thread with a knife tip held under the center of the thread, slip the
finished leaf under the thread and into position exactly on the top of the
leaf outlined on the pattern page. Hold the leaf in this position with two
fingers.
Be sure you have read through step 18before you do anything else.
12. Cut an 8-1;'2inch piece of fine, unwaxed, very clean thread that has not been
anti-static treated. See INSTRUCTIONS, Page 6 for excellent insulating
threads and substitutes. In 1986 most sewing threads are anti-static treated
and are too poor insulators for use in a KFM.
14. While keeping the thread straight between its two taped-down ends,
lower the thread so that it sticks to the two plastic strips. Then press the
thread against the plastic strips.
15. With the point of the knife, hold down the center of the thread against
the center of the THREAD LINE of the leaf. Then, with two fingers,
carefully fold over the hem and press it almost flat. Be sure that the
thread comes out of the corners of the hem. Remove the knife, and press
the hem down completely flat against the rest of the leaf.
16. Make small marks on the thread at the two points shown on the pattern
page. Use a ballpoint pen if available.
17. Loosen the second two small pieces of tape from the pattern paper, but leave
these tapes stuck to the thread.COVER THE TWO "TAPE HERE" RECTANGLES WITH SAME-SIZED PIECES
OF TAPE, IN ORDER TO KEEP FROM TEARING THIS PAPER WHEN
REMOVING TWO ADDITIONAL PIECES OF TAPE. THEN, BY PUTTING
TWO OTHER PIECES OF TAPE THIS SAME SIZE ON TOP OF THE FIRST
TWO PIECES, TAPE THE THREAD ONTO THIS GUIDE SHEET, AND LATER
ATTACH A LEAF TO THE TAPED-DOWN THREAD. .
DO NOT TOUCH
OR MARK THIS
1·INCH PART
OF THE THREAD
USE BALLPOINT PEN TO
MARK THREAD HERE,
I
THREAD LINE
I , \ TAPE HERE TO HOLD
THREAD SECURELY
OVER THREAD LINE
CENTER
OF THREAD
OF FINISHED
ALUMINUM·FOIL
LEAF
f MARK THREAD HERE
,
THREAD LINE
BAND·AID PLASTIC (1/8" X 1")
WITH STICKY SIDE UP AND
ENDS FOLDED UNDER SO AS
TO STICK TO ALUMINUM
(OR USE A VERY LITTLE EPOXY.)
z
~I;l:l
c:::qszYJ
;;;'
~
PATTERN (C)
(Cut out this guide along its border lines and tape to the top of a work table.)
WARNING: The parts of the thread that will be inside the can and on which the leaf will
be suspended must serve to insulate the high-voltage electrical charges to be placed on the leaf.
Therefore, the suspended parts of the thread must be kept very clean.
-w
tvtvVlI
0'>
C)
a..XII. Make the Plastic Cover
Cut out the paper pattern for the cover from the Pattern Page (8).
From a piece of clear, strong 'plastic, cut a circle approximately the same
size as the paper pattern. (Storm-window vinyl film. 4 mils thick. is best.)
Stretch the center of this circular piece of clear plastic over the open end of the
can. and pull it down close to the sides of the can. making small tucks in the
"skirt." so that there are no wrinkles in the top cover. Hold the lower part of
the "skirt" in place with a strong rubber band or piece of string. (If another
can having the same diameter as the KFM can is available, use it to make the
cover --to avoid the possibility of disturbing the leaf-suspending threads.)
tvtv0--
~
z
Vl.....,
::0
c::
("").....,
25z
Vl
;.p
rro
It
COVER
(CLEAR
PLAs-rIC)
INSIDe:
OF CAN
EDGE
OF PLASTIC
COVER
KEEP THIS SMALL PART
OF THE 1/4 IN. TAPE ,{
VERTICAL
WHILE PULLING TAPE
AROUND RIM OF CAN
RUBBER
BAND
OR
STRING
Keep vertical the small
part of the tape that
presses against the rim of
the can while pulling the
length ofthe tape horizontally around the can so as to bind the top ofthe pl~stic
cover snugly to the rim. Ifthis small part of the tape is kept vertical. the lower
edge ofthe tape will not squeeze the plastic below the rim of the can to such a
small circumference as to prevent the coverfrom being removed quite easily.
Make the cover so it fits
snugly. but can be taken
off and replaced readily.
Just below the top of the rim
ofthe can, bind the covering
plastic in place with a 1/4-
inch-wide piece of strong
tape. (Cloth duct tape is
best.Usetwothicknesses.
If only freezer or masking
tape is available, use three
or four thicknesses.)
To make the SEAT. cut a piece of a wooden pencil. or a stick. about one inch
long and tape it securely to the side of the can along the center line marked
SEAT on the pattern. Be sure the upper end of this piece of pencil is at the
same position as the top of the location for the SEAT outlined on the pattern.
The top of the SEAT is 3/4 inch below the top of the can. Be sure not to cover
or make illegible any part of the table printed on the paper pattern.
Cut out one of the"Reminders for Operators" and glue and/or tape it to the
unused side of the KFM. Then if is best to cover all the sides of the finished
KFM with clear plastic tape or varnish. This will keep sticky-tape on the end of
an adjustment thread or moisture from damaging the ..Reminders" or the
table.
s.
l.
2.
4.
3.
6.
XI. Install the Aluminum-Foil Leaves
In preparation for suspending the leaves inside the can. make two
shallow notches in the top ofthe rim of the can. Make one notch above
each of the two lines ("FASTEN THREADS HOLDING ALUMINUM
LEAVES HERE") on the paper Pattern attached to the outside of the
can. Make flat-bottomed notches by first filing a V-shaped notch. and
then using a fine-toothed hacksaw blade to make the notch rectangu-
lar. (If a file and/or a hacksaw blade are not available. the leaf-
suspending threads can be taped to the top of the rim of the can.)
Usethe two small pieces of tape stuck to the ends of a leaf-suspending thread to
attach the thread to the outside of the can. Attach the tapes on opposite sides of
the can. so as to suspend the leaf inside the can. See END VIEW sketch. Each of
the two marks on the attached thread MUSTrest exactlyina notch (oron the
top of the rim of the can. if you are unable to make notches). Be sure
thatthe hem-side ofeach ofthe two leaves will face outward. SeeEND
VIEW sketch.
Position and secure the second leaf. being sure that:
a. The smooth sides of the two leaves are not wrinkled or bent and face each
other. and are flush (= "right together") when not charged. See END VIEW
sketch and study the first photo illustration. "An Uncharged KFM".
b. The upperedges of the two leaves are suspended side by side and at the same
distance below the top of the can.
c. The leaf-suspending threads are in their notches in the top ofthe rim of
the can (or are taped with Band-Aid to the top of the rim ofthe can)
so that putting the cover on will not move the threads.
d. No parts of the leaf-suspending threads inside the can are taped down to the
can or otherwise restricted.
e. The leaf-suspending parts of the threads inside the can do not cross over,
entangle or restrict each other.
f. The threads come together where they go over the rim of the can. and
the leaves are flat and hang together as shown in the first photo illustration.
."An Uncharged KFM".
g. The leaves look like these photographed leaves. If not. make new,
better leaves and install them.
Coverwith tape the parts of the threads that extend down the outside ofthe can,
and also cover with more tape the small pieces of tape near the ends of the
threads on the outside of the can. Oruse epoxyorotherwaterproofglue to
attach the parts of the threads onthe ~ ofthe can securelyto the
can.
1.
2.
3.
4.REMINDERS FOR OPERATORS REMINDERS FOR OPERATORS
The drying agent inside a KFM is
O.K. if, when the charged KFM is
not exposed to radiation, its readings
decrease by I mm or less in 3 hours.
Reading: With the reading eye 12
inches vertically above the seat, note
on the mm scale the separationof the
lower edges of the leaves. If the right
leaf isat 10mm and the left leaf isat
7rnm, the KFM reads 17mm. Never
take a reading whilea leaf istouching
a stop-thread. Never use a KFM
reading that is less than 5 mm,
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and if
after a I-rninute exposure it reads 5
mrn, the difference in readings is 12
mm. The attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.6 RIhr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: If a person works
outside for 3 hours where the dose
rate is 2 R/hr, what is his radiation
dose? Answer: 3 hr x 2 RIhr =6 R.
Finding how long it takes to get a
eertain R dose: If the dose rate is 1.6
RIhr outside and a person iswilling
to take a 6 R dose, how long can he
remain outside? Answer:
6 R +1.6 Rj hr =3.75 hr =
3 hours and 45 minutes.
Falloutradialion guidesfor a healthy
person not previouslyexposed to a
total radiation dose of more than
100 R during a 2-week period:
6 R per day can betolerated for up to
two months without losing the ability
to work.
100R ina week or lessis not likelyto
seriously sicken.
350R in a few days results in a
50-50 chance of dying, under
post-attack conditions.
600 R in a week or less is almost
certain to cause death within a few
weeks.
The drying agent inside a KFM is
O.K. if, when Ihe charged KFM is
not exposed to radiation, its readings
decrease by.I mm or lessin 3 hours.
Reading: With the reading eye 12
inches vertically above the seat. note
on the mm scalethe separationofthe
lower edges of the leaves. Ifthe right
leaf isal 10mm and the left leaf isat
7mm, the KFM reads 17mm. Never
take a reading whilea leaf istouching
a stop-thread. Never use a KFM
reading that is less than 5 mm.
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and if
after a I-minute exposure it reads 5
rnm, the difference in readings is 12
mm. The attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.6 RIhr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: If a .person works
outside for 3 hours where the dose
rate is 2 RIhr, what is his radiation
dose? Answer: 3 hr x 2 RIhr =6 R.
Finding how long it takes 10 g~t a
certain R dose: If the dose rate is 1.6
RIhr outside and a person is willing
10 take a 6 R dose, how long can he
remain outside? Answer:
6 R + 1.6 Rj hr =3.75 hr =
3 hours and 45 minutes.
Falloutradiationguides for a healthy
person not previously exposed to a
total radiation dose of more than
100 R during a 2-week period:
6 R per day call betolerated for up10
two months withoutlosing the ability
to work.
100R in a week or lessisnot likely10
seriously sicken.
350R in a few days results in a
50-50 chance of dying, under
post-attack conditions.
600 R in a week or less is almost
certain to cause death within a few
weeks.
z
~c:::qsz
.Vl
;p
IJQ
~
.....V1
IVIV-.IPg 9 - (24)EXACT SIZE
CHARGING-WIRE
(a LIGHT INSULATED WIRE) mCKY-ENDED ADJUSTMENT-THREAD
(BELL-WIRE IS BEST) (OVERSIZED DRAWING)
tvtv
00
z
~
~
~SZ
ill
1
(l)
-C1'
~),
FINGER HOLD
,-FIN~R HOLD IIf~D£
I OF -I BY I *TAPE
j BARE·ENDED
ADJUSTMENT·THREAD
1/.,
I/. 1J\t
"/~ .
END OF 2·1/2 IN.
THREAD
STICKY·ENDED ADJUSTMENT.THREAD
(ACTUAL SIZE)
2 INCHES
,THREAD HELD BY r BY r
STUCK TO STICKY
3" 3"OF '4 BY '4 TAPE.
BAND·AID
TAPE
BAND·AID-TAPE
STOP
BARE WIRE
INSULATION
~ } BARE WIRE
ilE POINi FOR
ONE THREAD
WHOSETWO·
ENDS ARE THE u
ADJUSTMENT· 1E]l.•. ~----------------­iHREADS
THIS PART
GOESINSIDE
THE KFM CAN
8. Make the charging-wire by using the full-size,exact-size pattern on the right.
Doorbell wire with an outside diameter of about 1/16 inch is best, but any
lightweight insulated wire,such as part ofa lightweight two-wire extensioncord
splitinhalf, willserve.The illustrated wireismuch thickerthan bellwire.To stop
tape from possibly slipping up or down the wire, use a very little glue.
Ifa verythin plastic has been used for the cover, a sticky pieceoftape may need
to be attached to the end of the bare-ended adjustment thread, so both threads
can be used to hold the charging wire in a desired position.
The best tape to attach to an end of one of the adjustment-threads iscloth duct
tape. A square piece 3/4 inch by 3/4 inch is the sticky base. To keep this tape
sticky (free of paper fibers), the paper on the can should be covered with
transparent tape or varnish. A piece about 1/8 inch by 3/4 inch serves to stick
under one end of the sticky base, to hold the adjustment-thread. A 3/4 inch by
1-1/4 inch rectangular pieceoftape isused to make the finger hold - important
for making adjustments inside a dry-bucket.
Witha needleor pin, make a hole inthe plasticcover 1/2 inchfrom the rim ofthe
can and directly above the upper end of the CENTER LINE between the two
leaves.The CENTER LINE ismarked on the pattern wrapped around the can.
Carefully push the CHARGING-WIRE through this hole (thus stretching the
hole) until all ofthe CHARGING-WIREbelow its Band-Aid-tapestop isinside
the can.
S. With scissors, cut offthe "skirt" ofthe plastic cover until it extends only about
one inch belowthe top ofthe rim ofthe can.
6. Make a notch in the "skirt," about one inch wide, where it fits over the pencil
SEAT attached to the can. The "skirt" in this notched area should be only
about 5/8ofan inch long, measured down from the top ofthe rim ofthe can.
7. Removethe plastic cover, and then tape the lower edges of the ••skirt," inside
and out, using shortlengths of 1/4-inch-widetape. Before securing each short
piece oftape, slightly open the tucks that are being taped shut on their edges,
so that the "skirt" flares slightly outward and the cover can be readily
removed.
9. FromthePatternPage(B)cutoutthe SCALE.ThentapetheSCALE to
the undersideofthe plasticcover,inthe positionshownon thepattern
for the cover, and also by the drawings. Preferably use transparent
tape. Be careful notto cover with tape any of the division lines on the
SCALE between 20 on the right and 20 on the left of O.
10. Put the plastic cover on the KFM can.Ico
0>o,
Ico
0>o,~_ •• _. _.,- "-J-- ---e---..·...
When preparing to charge a KFM, be sure its anhydrite is fresh. (Under humid
conditions, sometimes in only 2days enough water vapor willgo through the plastic
cover to make the dryingagent ineffective.) Besure no piece of anhydrite ison top of
another piece. Re-read VIII 7 and VIII 8.
tvtv\0
z
CIl
;dc:
Boz
CIl
~CII:lC1I
-'-i
Move the electrostatically charged part of the rubbed plastic rather slowly
past the upperend of the charging-wire, while lookingstraightdown on the
KFM. Keep the hard plastic approximately perpendicular to the charging-
wireand about 1/4 to 1/2 inch away from its upper end. The chargejumps
the spark gaps and charges the leaves of the KFM. Charge the leaves
sufficiently to give a reading of at least 15 mm.
Pull down on an insulating adjustment-thread to raise the lower end of the
charging-wire. (If the charging-wire has been held in itscharging position by
itssticky-ended adjustment-thread beingstuck to the top ofthe clear plastic
cover, to avoid possibly damaging the threads: (I) pull down a little on the
bare-endedadjustment-thread;and (2)detach, pull down on, and secure the
sticky-ended adjustment-thread to the sideofthe can, soas to raiseand keep
the lower end of the charging-wire closeto the underside of the clear plastic
cover.) Do not touch the charging-wire,because its insulation usually
is not goodenoughto preventthe chargefrom bleedingoffintothe
fingers.
To getthe most accurate readings possible.lightlybumporshake
the charged KFM (to remove any unstable part of the charge)
before taking the initial reading.
Ifthe initial reading is more than 20 mm, to get the most accurate
reading possible carefully partially discharge the leaves (by
touching them with the charging-wire while guiding the wire
with your fingers onits insulation), to reduce to 20mm orslightly
less the initialreadingthatyou will use. Orcompletelydischarge,
and recharge to 20 mm or slightly less.
To keep a KFM in excellent condition and to enable its drying
agent to last much longer before becoming ineffective. put the
whole KFM in an airtightcontainer, such as a large peanut butter
jar, with drying agent about an inchdeep on its bottom. Oratleast
keep the chargingpaperandthehardplasticchargingstripdry in
a sealablecontainer, suchas a Masonjar.with somedryingagent.
Charging a KFM from a Quickly Unwound Roll of Tape. (Quick unwinding
produces a harmless charge ofseveral thousand volts on the tape.)
a. Adjust the charging-wire so that its lowerend is about 1/16 inch above the
upper edges ofthe aluminum-foil leaves. Use the sticky-tape at the end of
one adjustment-thread to hold the charging-wire in this position. Stick this
tape approximately in line with the leaves, either on the side of the can or
on the plastic cover. (If the plastic cover is w~ak. it may be necessary to
put a piece ofsticky-tape on the end ofeach adjustment-thread. in order to
hold the charging-wire securely. Ifa charging-wire is not secure. its lower
end may be forced up by the likecharge on the leaves before the leaves can
be fully charged.)
e.
f.
g.
h.
L
2.
2'-.,... THREADS
IENOSIlIOT $HOWtII1",,,,sc.t.L[
L-INSlOE OlA" ~'t,.... ---------J
iltVsaot UNO
~ ~
,>-,,..
J-~l '~~,'/r g"''''KEF ~
, ~ r- ~~
I ~L -
d. Fold the square of paper in the
middle, and movethe hard plastic
rapidly back and forth so that it
isrubbed vigorously on the paper
inthe middle ofthisfolded square
-whilethe outsideofthis folded
square of paperissqueezed firmly
betweenthumbandlittlefinger
on one side, and the ends of
three fingers on the other, To
avoid discharging the charge on
the plastic to the fingers, keep
th,:>t'Y'I '),\1.1'.::1" frf'\rY'I thp pAope {"\fthp
Charging a KFM with Hard Plastic Rubbed on Dry Paper.
a. Adjust the charging-wire so
that its lower end is about
1/16 inch above the upper
edges of the aluminum-foil r-
leaves. Use the sticky-tape ;
at the end of one adjust-
ment-thread to hold the
charging-wire in this
position. Stick this tape
approximately in line with
the threads suspending the
leaves, either on the side of
the can or on top of the
plastic cover. (If the
charging-wire is held loose-
ly by the cover, it may be
necessary to put a piece of
sticky-tape on the end of each adjustment-thread in order to adjust the
charging-wire securely. Ifa charging-wire is not secure. its lower end may
be forced up by the like charge on the leaves before the leaves can be fully
charged.)
b. Select a piece of Plexiglas. a draftsman's plastic triangle, a smooth plastic
ruler, or other piece of hard. smooth plastic. (Unfortunately. not all types
of hard plastic can be used to generate a sufficient electrostatic charge.)
Be sure the plastic is dry.
For charging a KFM (especially inside a dry-bucket). cut a
rectangularpieceofhard plastic suchas Plexiglas about 1-1/2by
6 inches. Sharp corners and edges should be smoothed. To avoid,
contaminating the charging end with sweaty, oily fingers, it is
best to mark the other end with a piece of tape, and to hold it only
by its taped end.
c. Fold DRY paper (a piece of clean paper bag, or other smooth,
clean paper) to make an approximate square about 5 inches on a
side and 15 to 20 sheets thick. (This many sheets of paper lessens
leakage to the fingers ofthe electrostatic high-voltage charges to
be generated on the hard plastic and on the rubbed paper.)
1.Ico
0)
o,
Ico
C)
o,"GET SET" POSITION
b. The sketch shows the "GET
SET" position. preparatory to
unrolling the Scotch Magic
Transparent Tape. P.V.c. elec-
trical tape, or other tape. Be
sure tofirst remove the roll from
its dispenser. Some of the other
kinds of tape will not produce a
high enough voltage.
c. QUICKLY unroll 10to 12inches
of tape by pulling its end with
the left hand. while the right
hand allows the roll to unwind
while remaining in about the
same "GET SET" position only
.an inch or two away from the
KFM.
d. While holding the unwound tape tight, about perpendicular to the
charging-wire, and about I j 4inch away from the end of the charging-wire,
promptly move both hands and the tapeto the right ratherslowly - taking
about 2 seconds to move about 8 inches. The electrostatic charge on the
unwound tape "jumps"the spark gaps from the tape to the upperend of the
charging-wireand from the lower end of the charging-wireto the aluminum
leaves, and charges the aluminum leaves.
Be sure neither leaf is touching a stop-thread.
Try to charge the leaves enough to spread them far enough apart to give a
reading ofat least 15mm, but no more than 20 mm afterthe KFM has
been gentlybumpedorshaken to remove anyunstable partofthe
charge.
e. Pull down on an insulating adjustment-thread to raise the lower end of the
charging-wire. lfthe charging-wire has been held in charging position by
its sticky-ended adjustment-thread being stuck to the top of the clear
plastic cover, it is best first to
pull down a little on the ~bare-ended adjustment-thread,
and then to move, p~1I down on~ . 'I. ,no SPARK GAP
and secure the sticky-ended 4
adjustment-thread tn the side nf ~ ~/ ~.~.;'\the can so that the lower part of y :",,
the charging-wire is close to the' .
underside of the clear plastic •
cover.
TRANSFERRING CHARGE
Do not touch the charging-wire.
f. Rewind the tape dght on its roll, for future use when other tape may not
be available.
Testing Your KFM to Learn if it Can
Accurately Measure Low Dose Rates
Putfresh drying agentin your KFM and then charge and testthe KFM
in a location where it is not exposed to abnormal radiation. Take an
initial reading. If after 3 hours its reading has decreased by 1mm, or
less. this means that its leaf-suspending threads are good insulators
and that your KFM can reliably measure dose rates as low as 0.03
roentgens per hour (30 milliroentgens per hour). By post-attack
standards, 30 mRlhr is a low dose rate. In a whole month of
continuous exposure (an impossibility, because fallout decays), 30
mRlhr would result in a dose of 21.9 roentgens - not enough to
incapacitate. Warning: In.heavy fallout areas, for the first few days
after fallout deposition the dose rates inside even most good shelters
will be higher than 0.03 R/hr.
Trouble Shooting
If charging does not separate the two leaves sufficiently, take these corrective
actions:
I. Besure the pieces ofanhydrite in the bottom of the ionizationchamber(the
can) are in a single layer, with no piece on top of another and the top of no
piece more than Ij2 inch above the bottom of the can.
2. Check to besure thatthe threads suspendingthe leavesare not crossed; then
try to charge the KFM again.
3. If the KFM still cannot be charged, replace the used anhydrite with fresh
anhydrite.
4. Ifyou cannotchargea KFM when the air isvery humid, charge it inside its
dry-bucket.
5. If you cannot charge the KFM while in an area of heavy fallout, take it to
the place affordingthe best protectionagainst radiation, and try to charge it
there. (A dose rate of several hundred Rj hr will neutralize the charges on
both the chargingdevice and the instrument so rapidly that a KFM cannot
be charged.)
If a KFM or other radiation measuring instrument gives unexpectedly high
readings inside a good shelter, wipeall dust off the outside ofthe instrumentand
repeat the radiation-measurements. Especially when exposing a fallout meter
outdoors where there isfresh fallout, keep the instrument ina lidded pot, plastic
bag, or other covering to avoid the possibility of having it contaminated with
fallout particlesand afterwardsgetting erroneously high radiation measurements.
z
V>
-l::tlc:q
(5
Z
V>
;;,0
00
(b
00
IV
W
oI
m
Cla..3. I
- FLAPS BEFORE BEING
TURNED UP TO VERTI
CAL POSITION, BEFORE
TAPING
A CENTER PIECE ABOUT
I 112 In. BY 1 In. IS FIRST
CUT OUT OF THE CLEAR
PLASTIC COVER THEN
CUTS ARE MADE TO •
PRODUCE FLAPS, INOI
CATED BY THE DOTTED
LINES.
z
~
~
~ozC/l
"'Cl
'"~
::0
2. Cut out a circular piece of clear plastic with a diameter about 5 inches
larger than the diameterofthe top of the bucket. Clear vinyl 4 mils thick.
used for storm windows. etc.• is best. Stretch the plastic smooth across
the top of the bucket. and tie it in place. preferably with strong rubber
bands looped together toform a circle.
Make a plastic top that fits snugly but is easily removable. by taping over
and around the plastic just below the top of the bucket. One-inch-wide
cloth duct tape. or one-inch-wide glass-reinforced strapping tape. serves
well. When taping. do not permit the lower edge of the tape to be pulled
inward below the rim ofthe bucket.
XIV.Make and Use a Dry-Bucket
By charging a KFM while it is
inside a dry-bucket with a
transparent plastic cover (see
illustration). this fallout meter
can be charged and used even
if the relative humidity is
1000/0 outside the dry-bucket.
The air inside the dry-bucket is
kept very dry by a drying
agent placed on its bottom.
About a cupful' of anhydrite
serves very well. The pieces of
this dehydrated gypsum need
not be as'uniform in size as is
bestfor use inside a KFM. but
do not use powdered anhy-
drite.
A dry-bucket can be readily
made in about an hour by
proceedingas follows:
1. Remove the handle of a large bucket. pot. or can preferably with a top
diameter ofat least 11inches. A 4-gallon bucket having a top diameter of
about 14 inches and a depth of about 9 inches is ideal. A plastic tub
approximately this size is satisfactory. If the handle-supports interfere
with stretching a piece of clear plastic film across the top of the bucket.
remove them. being sure no sharp points remain.
tvVolI
oor-
I
oor-
0)
CL1"lt-~,-,,,,,,~.,.:---.~~-,
4. Cut twosmall holes (about 1 inch by 2 inches) in the plastic cover, as
illustrated. Then make the radial cuts (shown by dotted lines)
outward from the small holes, out to the solid-line outlines of the 3
inch by 4 inch hand-holes, so as toform small flaps.
S. Fold the small flaps upward. so they are vertical. Then tape them on
their outer sides, so they form a vertical "wall" about 3/4 inch high
around each hand-hole.
c.
d.
Replacing the plastic cover, that is best held in place with a
loop ofrubber bands.
Charging the KFM with your hands inside the plastic bags,
operating the charging device. Have another person
illuminate the KFM with a flashlight. When adjusting the
charging-wire, move your hands very slowly. See the
dry-bucket photos.
a.
6. Reduce the length of two ordinary plastic bread bags (or similar
plastic bags) to a length that is5inches greater than the height ofthe
bucket. (Do not use rubber gloves in place of bags; gloves so used
result in much more humid outside air being unintentionally pumped
into a dry-bucket when it is being used while charging a KFM inside
it.)
7. Insert a plastic bag into each hand-hole, and fold the edge of the
plastic bag about 1/2 inch over the taped vertical "wall" around
each hand-hole.
8. Strengthen the upper parts of the plastic bags by folding 2-inch
pieces oftape over the top ofthe "wall" around each hand-hole.
9. Make about a quart of anhydrite by heating small pieces of
wall-board gypsum, and keep this anhydrite dry in a Mason jar or
otherairtightcontainerwith a rubber or plastic sealer.
10. Make a circular aluminum-foil cover to place over the plastic cover
when the dry-bucket is not being used for minutes to hours. Make
this cover with a diameter about 4 inches greater than the diameter
of the top of the bucket, and make it fit more snugly with an
encircling loop of rubber bands, or with string. Although not
essential, an aluminum-foil cover reduces the amount ofwater vapor
that can reach and pass through the plasticcover, thus extending the
lifeofthe drying agent.
11. Charge a KFM inside a dry-bucketby:
Taking offwrist watch and sharp-pointedrings that might tear
the plasticbags.
b. Placing inside the dry-bucket:
(1) About a cup ofanhydrite or silica gel;
(2) the KFM, with its charging-wire adjusted in its charging
position; and
(3) dry, folded paper and the electrostatic charging device,
best a 5-inch-long piece of Plexiglas with smoothed
edges, to be rubbed between dry paper folded about 4
inches square and about20sheets thick. (Unrolling a roll
of tape inside a dry-bucket is an impractical charging
method.)
12. Expose the KFM to fallout radiation either by:
a. Leaving the KFM inside the dry-bucket while exposing it to
fallout radiation for one of the listed time intervals, and
reading the KFM before and after the exposure while it
remains inside the dry-bucket. (The reading eye should be a
measured 12 inches above the SEAT of the KFM, and a
flashlight or other light should be used.)
b. Taking the charged KFM out of the dry-bucket to read it,
expose it, and read it after the exposure. (If this is done
repeatedly, especially in a humid shelter, the drying agent
willnot be effective for many KFM chargings, and willhave to
be replaced.)
XV. Howto Use a KFM aftera NuclearAttack
A. Background Information
Ifduring a rapidly worsening crisis threatening nuclear war you are in the
place where you 'plan to take shelter, postpone studying the instructions
following this sentence until after you have:
(1) built or improved a high-protection-factor shelter (if
possible, a shelter covered with 2 or 3 ft of earth and
separatefrom flammable buildings), and
(2) made a KAP (homemade shelter-ventilating pump) if you
have the instructions and materials, and
(3) stored at least 15gallons ofwaterfor each shelter occupant if
you can obtaincontainers.
Havinga KFM or any other dependable fallout meter and knowing how to
operate it will enable you to minimize radiation injuries and possible
fatalities, especially by skillfully using a high-protection-factor fallout
shelter to control and limit exposures to radiation. By studying this
section youfirst willieam how to measure radiation dose rates (roentgens
per hour =R/hr), how to calculate doses [R] received in different time
intervals, and how to determine time Interval. (hours and/or minutes) in
which specified doses would be received. Then this section lists the sizes
ofdoses (numberofR) that the average person can tolerate without being
sickened, that he is likely to survive, and that he is likely to be killed by.
zVl
-l::cc:q
SzVl
;.p
()Q
(1)
N
o
tvwtvC)
a..
C)
a..tv
W
W
z
Vl....,
:;0
c:(j....,
oz
Vl
-es:o
\JQ
('l
N.....
h
6
8
o
3
5
8
TABLE USED TO FIND DOSE RATES IR/HR
FROM KFM READINGS
'DiffERENCE BETWEEN rHE REAOI"lG BEfORE EXPQSuR/
AND THE READING AF rER EXPOSuRE 'BPt Y srAfV[JARp
FOIL LEAVESI
01FF.' IN TIME INTERVAL OF AN EXPOSUR
READ· 15 SEC. 1 MIN. 4MIN. 16MIN. 1 HF
INGS R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HI
2mm 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.1 00
4mm 12. 3.1 0.8 0.2 0.0
6mm 19. 4.6 1.2 0.3 0.0
8mm 25. 62 16 0.4 0.1
10 mm 31. 7.7 2.0 05 0.1
12 mm 37. 9.2 2.3 0.6 0.1
14 mm 43. 11. 2.7 0.7 01
Ifan exposure results inthe readingafter the exposure being lessthan5
mm, recharge the KFM and expose itagainfor one ofthe shortertime
intervals listed.
4. Expose the KFM to fallout radiation for one of the time intervals
shown inthe vertical columns of the table attached to the KFM. (Study
the following table.) Ifthe dose rate isnot known even approximately.
first expose the fully charged KFM for one minute. For dependable
measurements outdoors. expose the charged KFM about 3feet above
the ground. The longer outdoor exposures usually are best made by
attaching the KFM with 2strong rubber bands to a stick or pole. being
careful never to tilt the KFM too much.
5. Read the KFM after the exposure. while the KFM rests on an
approximately horizontal surface.
6. Find the time interval that givesa dependable reading - by exposing
the fullycharged KFM for one or more ofthe listed time intervals until
the reading after the exposure is;
(ajNot lessthan 5 mm.
(b) At least 2 mm lessthan the reading before the exposure.
7. Calculate by simple subtraction the difference in the apparent
separation of the lower edges of the leaves before the exposure and
after the exposure. Anexample: Ifthe reading before the exposure is18
mm and the reading after the exposure is 6 mm, the difference in
readings is 18mm - 6 mm = 12mm.
8. If an exposure results in a difference in readings of less than 2 mm,
recharge the KFM and expose it again for one of the longer time
intervals listed. (If there appears to be no difference in the readings
taken before and afteran exposurefor one minute. this does not prove
there is absolutely no fallout danger. Take a longer reading.)
10. Use the table attached to the
KFM to find the dose rate
(RI hr) during the time of ex-
posure. The dose rate (Rjhr) is
found at the intersection of the
vertical column of numbers
under the time interval used
and of the horizontal line of
numbers that lists the calcu-
lated difference in readings at
its left end.
An example: Ifthe time interval of the exposure was 1 MIN. and the
difference inthe readings was 12mm, the table shows that the dose rate
during the time interval of the exposure was 9.2 R/HR (9.2 roentgens
per hour).
Anotherexample: Ifthe time intervalofthe exposure was 15SEC.and
the difference in readings was 11mm, the table showsthatthe dose rate
during the exposure was halfway between 31 R/HR and 37 R/HR;
that is, the dose rate was 34 RI hr.
9.
B. Finding the Dose Rate
1. Reread Section IV,"Whata KFM Isand How it Works."Also reread
Section XIII. "Two Ways to Charge a KFM," and actually do each
step immediately after reading it.
2. Chargethe KFM sothat it reads atleast 15mm. Nextraise the
lower end of the charging wire. Then gently bump or shake
the KFM to remove any unstable part of the charge. Read the
apparentseparationof the loweredgesof the leaveswhile the
KFM rests on an approximately horizontal surface. If the
reading is larger than 20 mm, bleed off enough charge to
reduce the initial reading to 20 mm or slightly less, for
maximum accuracy. Never take a reading while a leaf is
touching a stop-thread.
3. To prevent possible contamination of a KFM (or of any other fallout
meter) with fallout particles, keep it inside a plastic bag or other
covering whenthere isrisk offallout particles beingdeposited or blown
onto it. An instrumentcontaminated withfallout particles can givetoo
high readings, especially of the low dose-rate measurements made
inside a good shelter.
In places where fallout arrives several hours after the explosion, the
radioactivity of the fallout will have gone through its time period of.most
rapid decay while the fallout particles were still airborne. If you are in a
location so distant from the explosion that fallout arrives 8 hours after the
explosion, two days must pass before the initial dose rate measured at
your location willdecay to 1/10 its initial intensity.
Most fortunately for the future of all livitlg things. the decay of
radioactivity causes the sandlike fallout particleS to become less and less
dangerous with the passage oftime. Each fallout particle acts much like a
tiny Xray machine would if it were made so that its rays. shooting out
from it likeinvisible light. became weaker and weaker with time.
Contrary to exaggerated accounts of fallout dangers, the radiation dose
rate from fallout particles when they reach the ground in the areas of the
heaviest fallout will decrease quite rapidly. For example, consider the
decay of fallout from a relatively nearby, large surface burst, at a place
where the fallout particles are deposited on the ground one hour after the
explosion. At this time one hour after the explosion, assume that the
radiation dose rate (the best measure of radiation danger at a particular
time) measures 2,000 roentgens per hour (2,000 R/hr) outdoors. Seven
hours later the dose rate is reduced to 200 R/hr by normal radioactive
decay. Twodays after the explosion, the dose rate outdoors is reduced by
radioactive decay to 20R/hr. After twoweeks, the dose rate is less than 2
R/hr. When the dose rate is 2 Rzhr, people can go out of a good shelter
and workoutdoors for 3 hours a day, receiving a daily dose of 6 roentgens.
without being sickened.CJ)
a..
CJ)
a..II.
12.
Note in the table that if an exposure for one ofthe listed time
intervals causes the dJfference in readings to be 2 mm or 3
mrn, then an exposure 4times as long reveals the same dose
rate. An example: If a 1-min exposure results in a
difference in readings of2 mm, the table shows the dose rate
was 1.6 R/hr; then if the KFM is exposed for 4 minutes at
this same dose rate of 1.6 R/hr, the table shows that the
resultant difference in readings is 8 mm.
The longer exposure results in a more accurate
determination ofthe dose rate.
Ifthe dose rate isfound to be greater than 0.2 R/hr and time
is available, recharge the KFM and repeat the dose-rate
measurement --to avoid possible mistakes.
Another example: Assume that three days after an attack the occupants
of a dry, hot cave giving almost complete protection against fallout are in
desperate need ofwater. The dose rate outside is found to be 20 R/hr. To
backpack water from a source 3 miles away is estimated to take 2-112
hours. The cave occupants estimate that the water backpackers will
receive a dose in 2-112 hours ofSO R (2.5 hr x 20 R/hr = SO R). A dose of
SO R will cause only mild symptoms (nausea in about 10% of persons
receiving a SO R dose) for persons who previously have received only very
small doses. Therefore, one ofthe cave occupants makes a rapid radiation
surveyfor about 1-112 miles along the proposed route, stopping to charge
and read a KFM about every quarter of a mile. He finds no dose rates
much higher than 20 R/hr.
So, the cave occupants decide the risk is small enough to justify some of
them leaving shelterfor about 2-112 hours to get water.
Fortunately, the human body -- if given enough time -- can repair most of
the damage caused by radiation. An historic example: A healthy man
accidently received a daily dose of 9.3 R (or somewhat more) of
fallout-type radiation each day for a period of 106 days. His total
accumulated dose was at least 1000R. A dose of one thousand roentgens,
if received in a few days, is almost three times the dose likely to kill the
average man if he receives the whole dose in a few days and after a
nuclear attack cannot get medical treatment, adequate rest, etc.
However, the only symptomthis man noted was seriousfatigue.
The occupants ofa high-protection-factor shelter (such as a trench shelter
covered with 2 or 3 feet of earth and having crawlway entrances) would
receive less than 11200 ofthe radiation dose theywould receive outside.
Even in most areas of very heavy fal1out, persons who remain continously
in such a shelter would receive a total accumulated dose of less than 2S R
in the first day after the attack, and less than 100R in the first two weeks.
At the end of the first two weeks, such shelter occupants could start
working outside for an increasing length of time each day, receiving a
daily dose of no more than 6 R for up to two months without being
sickened.
C.. Calculating the Dose Received
The dose of fallout radiation -- that is, the amount of fallout radiation
received -- determines the harmful effects on men and animals. Being
exposed to a high dose rate is not always dangerous -- provided the
exposure is shortenough to result in only a small dose being received. For
example, if the dose rate outside an excellent fallout shelter is 1200 R/hr
and a shelter occupant goes outside for 30 seconds; he would be exposed
for 112of 1 minute, or 112 of 1160of an hour, which equals 11120 hour.
Therefore, since the dose he would receive ifhe stayed outside for 1 hour
would be 1200 R, in 30 seconds he would receive 11120 of 1200, which
equals 10R(1200Rdivided by 120 = 10 R). Atotal daily dose of 10 R (10
roentgens) will not cause any symptoms if it is not repeated day after day
for a week or more.
In contrast, if the average dose rate of an area were found to be 12 R/hr
and if a person remained exposed in that particular area for 24 hours, he
would receive a dose of 288 R(12 R/hr x 24 hr =288 R). Even assuming
that this person had beenexposed previously to very little radiation, there
would stilI be a serious risk that this 288 Rclosewould be fatal under the
difficult conditions thatwould fol1ow a heavy nuclear attack.
D. Estimating the Dangersfrom Different Radiation Doses
z
~c::ng
zY'
~
~
IVIVI
C\I,...
C)
a..
C\I,...
C)
a..To control radiationexposureinthis way,eachshelter must havea fallout meter,
and a daily record must bekept ofthe approximate total dose receivedeach day
by every shelter occupant, both while inside and outside the shelter. The long-
term penalty which would result from a dose of 100 R received within a few
weeksismuch lessthan many Americans fear. If 100average persons receivedan
externaldose of 100Rduring and shortly after a nuclear attack, thestudies ofthe
Japanese A-bomb survivors indicate that no more than one of them islikelyto
die during the following 30years as a result of this 100R radiation dose. These
delayed radiation deaths would be due to leukemia and other cancers. In the
desperate crisis period following a major nuclear attack, such a relatively small
shortening of life expectancy during the following 30 years should not keep
people from starting recovery work to save themselves and their fellowcitizens
from death due to lack of food and other essentials.
A healthy person who previously has received a total accumulated dose of no
more than 100R distributed over a 2-week period should realize that:
100R,evenifall receivedina day or less,isunlikely to require medical care
- provided during the next 2weeksatotal additionaldose ofno more thana
few R is received.
350 R received in a fewdays or lessresults in a 50-50 chance of being
fatal after a large nuclearattack whenfewsurvivors could get medical care,
sanitary surroundings, a well-balanced diet, or adequate rest.
600 R receivedina fewdays or lessisalmostcertainto cause death within a
few days.
E. Finding the Protection Factor of a Shelter
To avoid the necessity of repeatedly going outside a shelter to
determine the changing dose rates outside, find the shelter's protec-
tion factor (PF) by measuring the dose rate inside the shelter as soon
as it becomes high enough to be reliably measured. Then promptly
measure the dose rate outside. The uncontaminated shelter's
PF = Dose Rate Outside
Dose Rate Inside
An example: If the dose rate inside is found to be 0.2 Rlhr and the
'dose rate outside is 31 Rlhr, the shelter's
PF = 31 Rlhr =155
0.2 Rlhr
Then at future times the approximate dose rate outside can be
found by measuringthe dose rate inside and multiplyingitby 155.
Approximate Dose Rate Outside =Dose Rate Inside x PF.
F. Using a KFM to Reduce Radiation Doses Received
If a charged KFM is discharged and reads zero within a secondor
two after being taken outside a good shelter, this means that the
dose rate outside is hundreds of roentgens per hour. Get back
inside! Also remember that a 15-second reading is not as accurate
as are readings made in longer specified exposure times.
Inside most shelters, the dose received by an occupant varies considerably,
depending on the occupant's location. For example, inside an expedient
covered-trenchshelterthedose rate ishigher near theentrancethan inthe middle
of the trench. In a typical basement shelter the best protection is found in one
corner. Especiallyduring the first several hours after thearrivaloffallout, when
the dose rates and doses receivedare highest, shelter occupants should use their
fallout meters todetermine whereto placethemselvesto minimizethe dosesthey
receive.
They should useavailable tools and materials to reduce the doses they receive,
.especially during the first day, by digging deeper (if practical) and reducing the
size of openings by partially blocking them with earth, water containers, etc.
- while maintaining adequate ventilation. To greatly reduce the slight risk of
fallout particles entering the body through nose or mouth, shelter occupants
should cover nose and mouth with a towel or other cloth while the fallout is
being deposited outside their shelter, ifat the same time ventilating air isbeing
blown or pumped through their shelter.
The air inside an occupied shelter often becomes very humid. Ifa good flow of
outdoorair isflowing into a shelter - especiallyifpumped bybrieflyoperatinga
KAP or otherventilating pump- a KFM usuallycan becharged at theair intake
ofthe shelter room without puttingitinsidea dry-bucket. However, ifthe air to
which a KFM is exposed has a relative humidity of 90% or higher, the
instrument cannot be charged, even by quickly unrolling a roll of tape.
Inextensive areas of heavyfallout, the occupants ofmost home basements,that
provide inadequateshieldingagainstheavyfallout radiation, would beindeadly
danger. Byusingadependablefallout meter, occupantswould find that persons
lyingon the floor incertainlocationswould receivethe smallestdoses, and that,
ifthey improvise additionalshieldinginthese locations, thedoses receivedcould
begreatly reduced. Additionalshieldingcan beprovided bymakinga verysmall
shelter insidethe basementwhere the dose rate isfound to belowest. Furniture,
boxes, etc.can beusedfor walls,doorsfor the roof, and watercontainers,books,
and other heavy objects for shielding - especially on the roof. Or, if tools are
available, breaking through the basement floor and digginga shelter trench will
greatly increase available protection against radiation. If a second expedient
ventilatingpump, a KAP, (ora smallDirectionalFan), ismadeand usedasa
fan, such an extremely cramped shelter inside a shelter usually can be occupied
by several times as many persons as can occupy it without forced
ventilation.
END OF INSTRUCTIONS
zVl
-l
:::0
c::::(J
-l
(3
ZVl
'i:IIII
<ro
(l)
NW
NW
VI0>a..
I
C\I
~
0>a..H
tt:l Z
:><Cf.l
t-3t-3
~~
(")
"'dt-3
g:;~
tt:lZ
Cf.l
l&I
~
..,J
u
s
..,J
q:
~
:::>U
~ l&I
~ ~
l&. ..,J
o u
~ ~q: 0
l&I ..,J
l/) q:
l&I ~
Q :::>
iii U
/
BOTTOM OF CAN (ABOVE LIP)
+,--HOLES FOR STOP·THREAD ~+
ORNL·DWG 76-6535
'--
I
~
..,J
Cl::
~
~
~
I
'" TOP OF CAN (BELOW LIP)
~ FASTEN THREADS HOLDING ALUMINUM LEAVES HERE
I
I ,. TOP OF l·IN. PENCIL (FOR RULER REST)
1=~I'- SEATu::>zuww
~II)
:I: 0UW
Z~
-;-<{
... ~
~
HOLE
FOR
STOP·
THREAD
CUT EXACTL Y ON SIDE LINES .......
TABLE USED TO FIND DOSE RATES IR/HR)
FROM KFM READINGS
'DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE READING BEFORE EXPOSURE
AND THE READING AFTER EXPOSURE IB·I'I. YSTANDARD·
FOIL LEAVES}
CUT EXACTL Y ON SIDE LINES
DIFF.*IN TIME INTERVAL OF AN EXPOSURE
...l- READ· 15SEC. 1MIN. 4MIN. 16MIN. 1 HR.
/1 INGS R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR
2 mm 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.1 0.03
4 mm 12. 3.1 0.8 0.2 0.06
6 mm 19. 4.6 1.2 0.3 0.08
8 mm 25. 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.10
10 mm 31. 7.7 2.0 0.5 0.13
12 mm 37. 9.2 2.3 0.6 0.15
14 mm 43. 11. 2.7 0.7 0.18
e,
wO
aI~
0;:...JO::>...JOw::tal
II) •
II)Z
w-...JCIO0;0:I:":'
HOLE
FOR
STOP·
THREAD
~ TOP OF CAN (BELOWL/P) /
e,
wO FASTEN THREADS HOLDING ALUMINUM LEAVES HEREaI~
0;: -!.-,.TOP OF l·IN. PENCIL (FOR RULER REST)...JO::>...JOw ...Jw
'- SEAT,~
::tal TABLE USED TO FIND DOSE RATES IR/HR) _0:
l/) . u::>
l/)Z FROM KFM READINGS zu ~
~
w- 'DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE READING BEFORE EXI'()SURE WW ~...J~ ~l/)
o III AND THE READING AFTER EXI'()SURE 'B·I'I. Y STANDARD· :I: 0l&. ::t":' FOIL LEAVES} uW l&.
0 TIME INTERVAL OF AN EXPOSURE Z~ 0
~ *DIFF.*IN -;- <{.
+ ~
~
~ . READ· 15SEC. 1MIN. 4MIN. 16MIN. 1 HR. -k ... ~
~INGS R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR R/HR , -l/)
I ' - - HOLES FOR STOP·THREAD ~
l/)
l&I HOLE 2 mm 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.1 0.03 HOLE l&IQ Q
iii FOR 4mm 12. 3.1 0.8 0.2 0.06 FOR l&I iii~STOP· 6mm 19. 4.6 1.2 0.3 0.08 STOP· ..,J
THREAD 8mm 25. 6.2 1.6 0.4 0.10 THREAD Cl::
10mm 31. 7.7 2.0 0.5 0.13 ~
~12mm 37. 9.2 2.3 0.6 0.15 ~14mm 43. 11. 2.7 0.7 0.18 I BOTTOM OF CAN (ABOVE LIP)
~
..,J
~
..,J
q:
~
a
~~
~ ~
..,Jl&.
UO
~ ~o q:
..,J l&Iq: l/)
~l&I
ae
l/)
PATTERN PAGE (A)
PAPER PATTERN TO WRAP AROUND KFM CAN (GLUE OR TAPE SECURELY TO CAN)
CUT OUT THESE PATTERNS, EACH OF WHICH IS THE EXACT SIZE FOR A KFM.
CAUTlON: XEROX COPIES OF THESE PATTERNS MAY BE TOO LARGE.237
INSTRUCTIONS
EXTRA PAGE
PATTERN FOR CLEAR-PLASTIC COVER FOR KFM CAN
SHORT SIDE
~
~ f21- 1::::-
POSITION TO ATTACH ~I~
THE PAPER SCALE TO ~ ~
THE COVER OF CAN, ~ 0
PERPENDICULAR TO __ ~ e.,
THE KFM LEAVES ~I ~ "'"
/ ~ J..: 1--.
/' ~ ~S-
/ ~\
0\
I ~\I ~
\ ~J
\ HOLE FOR ~I
\ CHARGING- RI
"WIRE '- ~-. ~~o/
"'-J'~' ~~/<, 11~2in./.
<, - r---
OPEN EDGE
wc
en
oZ
o
~
THREAD LINE
8-PLY LEAF
THI RD-FOLD EDGE
CUT ALONG
ENDSOF MARKS-- 1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111
ALSO CUT ON _ 201510 5 0 5 101520
THIS LINE
CUT ALONG
ENDSOF MARKS-- 1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111
ALSO CUT ON _ 201510 5 0 5 101520
THIS LINE
FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN
JT OUT EXACTLY ON SIDE LINES)' PAPER SCALE (TO BE CUT OUT)
PATTERN PAGE (B)
CAUTION: XEROX COPIES OF THE FINISHED-LEAF AND THE
SCALE PATTERNS MAYBE SLIGHTLYTOO LARGE.COVER THE TWO "TAPE HERE" RECTANGLES WITH SAME-SIZED PIECES
OF TAPE, IN ORDER TO KEEP FROM TEARING THIS PAPER WHEN
REMOVING TWO ADDITIONAL PIECES OF TAPE. THEN, BY PUTTING
TWO OTHER PIECES OF TAPE THIS SAME SIZE ON TOP OF THE FIRST
TWO PIECES, TAPE THE THREAD ONTO THIS GUIDE SHEET, AND LATER
ATTACH A LEAF TO THE TAPED-DOWN THREAD.
USE BALLPOINT PEN TO
MARK THREAD HERE --.
TAPE
HERE ~ THREAD LINE
, 1'-TAPE HERE TO HOLD
THREAD SECURELY
OVER THREAD LINE
DO NOT TOUCH
OR MARK THIS
l-INCH PART
OF THE THREAD
CENTER
OF THREAD
OF FINISHED
ALUMINUM-FOI L
LEAF
f MARK THREAD HERE
THREAD LINE
DO NOT TOUCH
THIS l-INCH PA.RT
BAND-AID PLASTIC (1/8" Xl")
WITH STICKY SIDE UP AND
ENDS FOLDED UNDER SO AS
TO STICK TO ALUMINUM
(OR USE A VERY LITTLE EPOXY.)
TAPE
HERE
H
t:rJZ
~CJ)
>-3>-3
:::0:;0
;:l>C:::
n'"0>-3
;:l>H
00t:rJZ
CJ)
PATTERN (C)
(Cut out this guide along its border lines and tape to the top of a work table.)
WARNING: The parts of the thread that will be inside the can and on which the leaf will
be suspended must serve to insulate the high-voltage electrical charges to be placed on the leaf.
Therefore, the suspended parts of the thread- must be kept very clean.
IV
(.;.)
00REMINDERS FOR OPERATORS
H
tr:1Z:><C/lt-:3t-:3:::0:::0
:X>C::(1
'\:It-:3:x>H00tr:1Zo:
Fallout radiation guides lor a healthy
person not previously exposed to a
total radiation dose of more than
100 R during a 2-week period:
6 R per dav can betolerated for up to
two months without losing the ability
to work.
100R in a week or less is not likely to
seriously sicken.
350 R in a few days results in a
50-50 chance of dying, under
post-attack conditions.
600 R in a week or less is almost
certain to cause death within a few
weeks.
Reading: With the reading eye 12
inches vertically above the scat. note
on the mm scale the separation of the
lower edges of the leaves. lfthc right
leaf is at 10 mm and the Idt leaf isat
7mrn. the KFM reads 17rnrn. Never
takea reading while a lcatis touching
a stop-thread. Never use a KFM
reading that is less than 5 mm.
REMINDERS FOR OPERATORS
lhe drying agent inside a KFM is Finding how long it takes to get a
O.K. if. when the charged KFM is certain R dose: If the dose rate is 1.6
not e-xposed to radiation. its readings R hr outside and a person is willing
decrease bvl rnm or less in J hours. to take a 6 R dose. how long can he
remain outside'! Answer:
h R : I.h R hr =3.75 hr =
J hours and 45 minutes.
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and il
after a l-rninutc exposure it reads 5
mm. the difference in readings is 12
mm. The attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.6 R hr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: II a person works
outside for J hours where the dose
rate is 2 R hr. what is his radiation
dose" Answer: J hr x 2 R hr =6 R.
Fallout radiation guidt"5for a hcalthv
person not previously exposed to a
total radiation dose of more than
HXl R during a Z-wcek period:
Finding how long it takes to get a
certain R dose: Ifthe dose rate is I.n
R hr outside and a person is willing
to take a nR dose. how long GHl he
remain outside? Answer:
h R : I.h R hr = 3.75 hr =
.\ hours and 45 minutes
6 R per Jay can he tolerated for up to
two months without losing the ability
to work.
100 R in a week or less is not likclv to
seriously sicken. -
350 R in a few days results in a
50-50 chance of dying, under
post-attack conditions.
600 R in a week or less is almost
certain to cause death within a fc\l,
weeks.
(he drying agent inside a KFM is
O.K. if. when the charged KFM i-,
not exposed to radiation. ih readings
decrease hy I mrn.or it.'ssin J hours.
Reading: With the reading eye 12
inches vcrticallv above the scat. note
on the mm scale the separation of the
lower edges of the leaves. If the right
leaf is at 10rum and the left leaf isat
7 rum. the KFM reads 17 mm. Never
take a reading while a leaf istouching
a stop-thread. Never usc a KFM
reading that is less than 5 rnrn.
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and it
after a l-minutc exposure it reads 5
rnm. the difference in readings is 12
mill. lhc attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.fl R hr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: If a person works
outside for .\ hours where the dose
rate is 2 R he what is his radiation
dose'! Answer: J hr x 2 R hr e 6 R.
IV
W\C)INSTRUCTIONS
(A)
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PERSONS CONCERNED
WITH REPRODUCING THE KFM INSTRUCTIONS
The KFM instruction pages are printed so that they can be readily cut out and pasted up (using the
"LA YOUT FOR 12-PAGE TABLOID"given on page 242)to expedite rapid reproduction preparatoryto
mass distribution. No authorization is required to reproduce this survival information.
Allof the paste-ups should be photo-reduced to fit yoursizenewspaper,.EXCEPTfourcut-outs[paste-ups
(15), (18), (21) and (24)] and one drawing [paste-up (26)] SHOULD REMAIN AT 100%.
To make the instruction pagesfullycamera-readyfor paste-up and photographing, itisnecessary:(I) To cut off
each page's title and number (such as "INSTRUCTIONS, Page 2"and "214");(2) To usea camera-invisible
blue pencilto copy the numbers on the back of each page onto the front of that page, writing them ina blank
space nearest to the approximate original position of the numbers; (3) To cut out each of the 40 paste-ups.
On the back ofeach paste-upare the numberof thetabloid page to which the paste-up isto beattached and
(in parentheses)the number ofthe paste-up itself. Forexample, on the back of"INSTRUCTIONS, Page 2"
are printed the following: "Pg I -(2)"and"Pg I-(3)."Thus, this page containstwo paste-ups, both ofwhich
should beattached to page Iofthe tabloid paste-up. The positions in whic~ they should beattached to page
I are shown in the layout sketch on page 242..
Timed field tests by two newspapers have shown that less than 40 minutes is required to begin printing a
KFM tabloid. Each test began when the newspaper wasgivenonly written instructionslikethis pageand the
following layout page, alongwith KFM instructions likethose inthis book-exceptthatthe index numbers
were already printed in camera-invisible blue on each half page of the instructions.
The camera-ready copy is for use with a straight lens (100% horizontal and 100%vertical reproduction).
TABLOI D
LAYOUT SHEET
All photographs are 85-line screen.
6 7
CENTER FOLD
OF A 12-PAGE
TABLOID, INDICATING
TABLOID Page 6 AND
Page 7.
The following layout sketch for a 12-page tabloid indicates where each of the numbered paste-ups [(I),
(2),... (40)]should be pasted-up and what spaces should be left blank. This positioning of the paste-ups is
necessary to permit a KFM-maker to cut out the patterns without destroying any instructions printed on
opposite sides of the 12tabloid pages.z
Ul--i
::tI
C
o
--i
o
Z
Ul
."
o
::0
"'0
:::r::
o--i
o
G)
::tI
:r>
"'0
:::r::
fTI
::tI,
"'0
::tI
Z
--i
fTI
::tI
......
III
6
tJB
LEAVE
BLANK
LEAVE
BLANK (20) ( 23)
rPAGE II OF TABLOID
(8)
DRAWING
8 (15) CUT- OUT
IP. P. (A)
(25) (27)
(26) (18)
DRAW- CUT-OUT
ING (28 ) P. P. (8)
GGBG 10 . ~E:~~ QG
, ~ GB 8GGB
[PAGE I OF TABLOID
,
rPAGE 12 OF TABLOID
4 (21) 9
CUT-OUT I
PATTERN (C)
(13 ) (16 )
1(24) CUT- OUT I
( 14} (17) (29) (30 )
I LOGO (I) II
12 Goc]
(37) (39)
--
BG
( 38) (40)
--
LAYOUT FOR 12-PAGE TABLOID
NUMBERS INSIDE PARENTH ESES r(,) THROUGH (40)] ARE PASTE-UPS CUT OUT OF THE INSTRUCTIONS PAGES
N.p.
NAppendix D
Expedient Blast Shelters
I~CREA~NGIMPORTANCE
The majority of urban and suburban Americans
would need blast shelters to avoid death or injury if
they did not evacuate before an all-out nuclear attack.
As nuclear arsenals continue to grow, an increasing
majority would need the protection of blast shelters. In
an attack on militarily relevant targets, as much
as 5o/c; of the total area of the 48 states could be
subjected to blast damage severe enough to destroy or
damage homes - depending on the number of
warheads assigned to each hard target, weapon
reliability, etc. If blast shelters affording protection up
to the 15-pounds-per-square-inch (15 psi) overpressure
range were available to everybody and were occu-
pied at the time of attack, the great majority of
the occupants would survive all blast, fire, and
radiation effects in the blast areas subjected to
less than 15-psi blast effects.
Fifteen-psi blast shelters will survive as
close as about 1.5 miles from ground zero of a
1-megaton surface burst, and about 2.3 miles
from ground zero or a 1-megaton air burst.
Except in high-density urban areas where the
air supply openings andexits of shelters are all
too likelyto be coveredwith blast-hurleddebris,
the area in which people inside good earth-
covered 15-psi blast shelters would be killed
would be onlyabout 1/6th as large as theareain
which most people sheltered in typicalAmeri-
can homes probably would die from blast and
fire effects alone.
Blast tests have indicated that the Small-
Pole Shelter (the most blast-resistant of the
earth-covered expedient shelters described in
Appendix A) should enable its occupants to
surviveup to the50-psioverpressure range - if
built with the blast-resistant and radiation-
protective features described in following sec-
tions, and if located outside an urban area.
Calculations show that this earth-covered ex-
pedient blast shelter also would give adequate
protection atthe50-psiblastoverpressure range
againstthe intenseinitialnuclearradiationthat
is emitted from the fireball of a 1-megaton
explosion. However, to make this shelter (see
page 258) provide adequate protection against
the even more intense initial nuclear radiation
that would reach the 50-psi overpressure range
from thefireballofa500-kilotonorsmallerexplo-
sion, it should have at least 6 feet ofearth cover
and additional cans of water should be kept
ready to be placed in the horizontal parts of the
entrywayspromptlyafterthe shelterisoccupied.
The life-saving potential of well designed, well
built blast shelters is a demonstrated fact. Millions of
Americans living in high-risk areas would be able to
build expedient blast shelters within only a few days-
provided they weregivenfield-tested instructions,
had made some preparations before the crisis
arose, had a few days of recognized warning,
and during the crisis were motivated by the
President. The following information is given in the
hope ofencouraging more Americans to make prepara-
tions for blast protection. Also, it may serve to increase
the number who realize the need for permanent blast
shelters in high-risk blast areas.
Some informed citizens-particularly those who
live near large cities or in their outer suburbs-may
choose to build earth-covered expedient blast shelters
in their backyards, rather than to evacuate. Going into
a strange area and trying to build or find good shelter
. and otheressentials of lifewould entail risks that many
people might hesitate to take, particularly if they live
outside the probable areas of severe blast damage. For
such citizens, the best decision might be to stay at
home, build earth-covered expedient blast shelters,
supplythem with the essentials for long occupancy, and
remain with their possessions.
The following descriptions of the characteristics
and components of expedient blast shelters should
enable many readers to use locally available materials
to provide at least 15-psi blast protection. Pre-crisis
preparations are essential, as wellas the abilityto work
veryhard for two to four days. (Field-tested instructions
are not yet available; to date only workers who were
supervised have built expedient blast shelters.s)
PRACTICALITY OF EXPEDIENT
BLAST SHELTERS
At Hiroshimaand Nagasaki,simple wood-framed
shelters with about 3 feet of earth over wooden roofs
were undamaged by blast effects in areas where
substantial buildings were demolished."Figure 0.1 shows a Hiroshima shelter that people
with hand tools could build in a day, if poles or
timber were available. This shelter withstood blast
and fire at an overpressure range of about 65 psi. Its
narrow room and a 3-foot-thick earth cover brought
about effective earth arching; this kept its yielding
wooden frame from being broken.
Fig. OJ. A small, earth-covered backyard
shelter with a crude wooden frame-undamaged,
although only 300 yards from ground zero at
Hiroshima.
Although the shelter itself was undamaged, its
occupants would have been fatally injured because
the shelter had no blast door. The combined effect of
blast waves, excessive pressure, blast wind, and burns
from extremely hot dust blown into the shelter (the
popcorning effect) and from the heated air would
have killed the occupants. For people to survive in
areas of severe blast, their shelters must have strong
blast doors.
In nuclear weapons tests in the Nevada desert,
box-like shelters built of lumber and covered with
sandy earth were structurally undamaged by 10- to
15-psi blast effects. However, none had blast doors,
so occupants of these open shelters would have been
injured by blast effects and burned as a result of the
popcorning effect. Furthermore, blast winds blew
away much ofthe dry, sandyearth mounded over the
shelters for shielding; this resulted in inadequate
protection against fallout radiation.
Twelve different types ofexpedient shelterswere
blast-tested by Oak Ridge National Laboratory
during three of Defense NuclearAgency's blast tests.5
Two of these tests each involved the detonation of a
million pounds or more of conventional explosive;
air-blast effects equivalent to those from a l-kiloton
nuclear surface burst were produced by these
chemical explosions.
Several of these shelters had expedient blast
doors which were closed during the tests. Figure 0.2
shows the undamaged interior of the best expedient
blastsheltertested priorto 1978,an improvedversion
of the Small-Pole Shelter described in Appendix A.
Its two heavy plywood blast doors excluded
practically all blast effects; the pressure inside rose
only to 1.5 psi-an overpressure not nearly high
enough to break eardrums. The only damage was to
the expedient shelter-ventilating pump (a KAP) in
the stoop-in entryway. Two men worked about 5
minutes to replace the 4 flap-valves that were blown
loose.
Fig. 0.2. Undamaged interior of a Small-Pole
Shelter after blast testing at the 53-psi overpressure
range. Large buildings would have been completely
demolished.
When blast-tested at 5-psi overpressure, not
even the weakest covered-trench shelters with
unsupported earth walls (described in Appendix A)
were damaged structurally. However, ifthe coveringearth were sandy and dry and ifit wereexposed to the
blast winds of a megaton explosion at the 5-psi
overpressure range, so much earth would be blown
away that the shelter would give insufficient
protection against fallout radiation. Much of the dry,
shielding earth mounded over some of the above-
ground shelters was, in fact, removed by the blast
winds of these relatively small test explosions, evenat
the lower overpressure ranges at which homes would
be wrecked. In contrast, in blast tests where the
steeply mounded earth was damp, little blast-wind
erosion resulted. (The reader should remember that
even if shelters without blast doors are undamaged,
the occupants are likely to suffer injuries.)
CONSTRUCTION PRINCIPLES
Millions of Americans-if given good instruc-
tions, strong motivation, and several days to
work-should be able to build blast shelters with
materials found in many rural areas and suburban
neighborhoods. During a crisis, yard trees could be
cut down for poles and sticks, and a garage or part of
a house could be torn down for lumber. Many
average citizens could build expedient blast shelters if
they learn to:
• Utilize earth arching by making a yielding
shelter. The remarkable protection that eartharching
gives to those parts of a shelter designed to use it is
illustrated by Fig. D.3.
This picture shows the unbroken roof of a 4-
foot-wide Pole-Covered Trench Shelter that was
Fig. D.3. Effective earth arching in the earth
covering of this 4-ft-wide Pole-Covered Trench
Shelter prevented a single pole from being broken by
blast forces that exerted a downward force of 53 psi
(over 31/2 tons per square foot) on the overlying
earth.
built in rock-like soil and blast tested where the blast
pressure outside was 53 psi. Its strong blast doors
prevented the blast wave from entering. Without the
protection of earth arching that developed in the 5
feet of earth cover over the yielding roof poles, the
poles would have been broken like straws. In
contrast, the ground shock and earth pressure
produced by l-kiloton blast effects almost com-
pletely collapsed the unsupported, rock-like earth
walls.
Fig. D.4. Post-blast interior of an Above-
ground, Door-Covered Shelter that survived l-kilo-
ton blasteffects at the 5.8-psi overpressurerange. The
shelter walls were made of bedsheets containing
earth, as described in Appendix A.
Figure D.4 also indicates the effectiveness
of earth arching. This photo shows the roof of a
small, earth-covered fallout shelter, as it appeared
after surviving blast effects severe enough to
demolish most homes. The roof was made of light,
hollow-core, interior doors and looks as though it
had been completely broken. In fact, only the lower
sheets of l/s-inch-thick veneer of the hollow-core
interior doors were broken. (These breaks were
caused by a faulty construction procedure-a front-
end loader had dumped several tons ofearth onto the
uncovered doors.) The upper l/s-inch-thick sheets of
veneer were bowed downward, unbroken, until an
earth arch formed in the 2-foot-thick earth covering
and prevented the thin sheets from being broken.
Earth arching also prevented this roof from being
smashed in by blast overpressure that exerted a
pressure of 5.8 psi (835 pounds per square foot) on
the surface of the earth mounded over this open
shelter. (See Appendix A for detailsofconstruction.)
• Make shelters with the minimum practical
ceiling height and width. Most 'of the narrowcovered-trench shelters used by tens of thousands of
Londoners during the World War II blitz were built
with only 41/z-foot ceilings, to maximize blast
protection and minimize high water-table problems.
These shelters were found to be among the safest for
protection against nearby explosions. The Chinese
also have a good understanding of this 'design
principleand skillfully utilize the protection provided
by earth arching. A Chinesecivil defense handbook
states: "... the height and width of tunnel shelters
should be kept to the minimum required to
accommodate the sheltering requirements," and
"The thicker the protective layer of earth, the greater
the ability to. resist blast waves.t"
• Shore earth walls to prevent their caving in as a
result of ground shock and earth pressure. Most
unshored (that is, unsupported) earth walls are
partially collapsed by ground shock at much lower
blast overpressuresthanthoseat which a flexible roof
protected by earth arching isdamaged. Figure 0.5 is '
a picture of a seated dummy taken by a high-speed
movie camera mounted inside an unshored, Pole-
Covered Trench Shelter of the Russian type tested at
the 20-psi range. (A second dummy was obscured by
blast-torncurtains made of blankets.) The shelter had
an open stairway entryway, positioned at right angles
to the stand-up-height trench and facing away from
the targeted "city"so as to minimize the entry of blast
waves and blast wind.
Fig. 0.5. A dummy in an unshored Pole-
Covered Trench Shelter as it is struck by collapsing
rock-like earth walls. The photo also shows the
shelter's blanket-curtains as they are torn and blown
into the shelter by the 180-mph blast wind.
(Immediately after this photo was taken, the
dummies were hit by the airborne blast wave and
blast wind. Outside, the blast wind peaked at about
490 mph.)
Figure 0.6 is a post-blast view of the essentially
undamaged earth-covered roof poles and the
disastrously collapsed, unshored shelter walls of the
Russian shelter tested at 20 psi." Russian civil
defense books state that unshored fallout shelters do
not survive closer to the blast than the 7-psi
overpressure range. This limitationwas confirmed by
an identical shelter tested at 7 psi; parts of its
unshored walls were quite badly collapsed by the
ground shock from an explosion producing merely
l-kiloton blast effects.
Fig. 0.6. Dummies after ground shock from
l-kiloton blast effects at the 20-psi range had
collapsed the rock-like walls ofa hardeneddesert soil
called caliche. The dummies' steel "bones" and
"joints" prevented them from being knocked down
and buried. The fallen caliche all around them kept
them from being blown overby the airblast wave and
180-mph blast wind that followed.
Unsupported earth walls should be sloped as
much as practical. The length and strength of
available roofing material should be considered and,
in order to attain effective earth arching, the
thickness of the earth cover should be at least halfas
great as the distance between the edges of the trench.
The stability of the earth determines the proper
method for shoring the walls of a trench. shelter.
Methods for shoring both loose, unstable earth and
firm, stable earth are described below:
*In loose, unstable earth such as sand, the
walls of all underground shelters must be shored.
First, an oversized trench must be dug with gently
sloping sides. Next, the shoring is built, often as a
freestanding, roofless structure. Then earth must bebackfilled around the shoring to a level a few inches
higher than the uppermost parts of the shoring, as in
Fi.g. 0.7. Finally, the roof poles or planks must be
placed so that they are supported only by the
backfilled earth. Blast tests have indicated that a
Pole-Covered Trench Shelter thus proportioned and
lightly shored should protect its occupants against
disastrous collapse of its wallsat overpressure ranges
up to 15 psi.
• In firm, stable earth, it is best first to dig a
trench a few incheswider than 7feet(the length ofthe
roof poles) and I foot deep. Next, dig the part to be
shored, down the center of this shallow trench, using
the dimensions given for the shoring in Fig. 0.7. The
trench walls should be sloped and smoothed quite
accurately, so that the shoring can be tightened
againsttheearth. Iftheshoringdoesnotpresstightl~
against the trench walls,large wedges ofearth may be
jarred loose, hit the shoring, and cause it to collapse.
A different, comparativelysimple way to tighten
shoring is indicated by Fig. 0.8. This sketch shows a
4-pole frame designed to be installed every 2
1
/2 feet
along a trench in stable earth and to be tightened
against trench-wallshoringwith the same dimensions
as those shown in Fig. 0.7. Note that the two
horizontal brace poles have shallow "V" notches
ORNL-DWG 78-14430R
Fig. 0.7. An illustration of several ways to shore a trench inunstableearth, using variousmaterials. A
4-piece frame (consistingof4poles, or 4boards, installed asshownabove) should be installed every2
1
/2feetalong
the length ofthe trench, including the horizontal parts ofthe entryways. Allpartsofthe shoringshould beat least
2 inches below the roof poles, so that the downward forces on the roof will press only on the earth.WALL
POLE
I... -I
Fig. 0.9. Chinese "Man" Shelter tested at
20 psi, and undamaged because the thin poles yielded·
and were protected by earth arching. This drawing
was taken from a Chinese civil defense manual. The
dimensions are in centimeters.
I~
When blast-tested in loose, unstable soil, the
unsupported earth walls of the trench below the wall
poles were squeezed in. The 12-inch width ofthefoot
trench was reduced to as little as 4 inches by the short-
duration forces produced by 0.2-kiloton blast effects
at 50 psi. The much longer duration forces of a
megaton explosion would be far more damaging to
the shelter at lower overpressure ranges, due to
destabilizing and squeezing-in unshored earth at
depths many feet below ground level.
Calculations based on blast-test findings indi-
cate that the unsupported earth walls of a shelter are
likely to fail ifthe aboveground maximum overpress-
ure is greater than 5 to 7 psi and this overpressure is
caused by an explosion that is a megaton or more.
horizontal poles at the top of the triangle, one tied
inside and the other tied outside the triangle, to hold
the wall poles together. Before covering this shelter
with earth, a-o-inch-thickcoveringof small limbs was
placed horizontally across the approximately3-inch-
wide spaces between the 61/2-foot wall poles; the limbs
were then covered with bedsheets.
ORNL DWG 78·17246R
BOTTOM OF
SHALLOW V
SAWED AT SAME
SLOPE AS WALL POLE
Fig. 0.8. A 4-pole frame designed so that it can
be tightened against the shoring materials that must .
press firmly against the walls ofa trenchduginstable
earth. (In this sketch, the middle sections of three
poles have been removed, sothat the upper brace pole
may be seen more clearly.)
sawed in both ends. If these brace poles are driven
downward when positioned as shown, the two wall
poles are forced outward against the shoring
materials placed between them and the earth walls.
An upper brace pole should be cut to the length
needed to make it approximately the same height as
the roof poles on each side of it (no higher) after the
shoring is tightened. Finally, each "V"-notched end
should be nailed to its wall pole.
Light, yielding poles can serve simultaneously
both to roofand to shorea shelter. A good example is
the Chinese "Man" Shelter illustrated in Fig. 0.9,
requiring comparatively few poles to build.21This
shelter is too cramped for long occupancy, and its
unshored, lower earth walls can be squeezed in by
blast pressure. Therefore, it is not recommended if
sufficient materials are available for building a well-
shored, covered-trench shelter. It is described here
primarily to help the reader understand the construc-
tion of similarly designed entryways, outlined later in
this appendix. The room and the horizontal entryway
of the model tested were made of 61/2-foot poles
averaging only 3 inches in diameter. It had two
vertical, triangular entries of ORNL design. Each
was protected by an expedient triangular blast door
made of poles. In Fig. 0.9, note the two small(Most homes would be severelydamaged by the 3-psi
blast effects from a I-megaton or largerweapon. This
damage would result one mile closer to ground zero
of a I-megaton surface burst than the distance at
which the unshored earth walls of some shelters
would be collapsed. For a 20-megaton surface burst,
the corresponding reduction in distance would be
about 2.7 miles.)
• Build sufficiently long and strong entryways.
Blast shelters need longer horizontal entryways,
taller vertical entryways, and thickerearth cover than
do most fallout shelters; these are needed primarily
for increased protection against high levels of initial
nuclear radiation. The entryways of the Small-Pole
Shelter described in Appendix A.3. (with the
improvements for increased blast protection outlined
in the following section of this appendix) afford
protection against both blast and radiation up to the
50-psi overpressure range. However, these entryways
require straight poles 14 feet long; these may be
difficult to find or transport.
In contrast, both the horizontal and the vertical
parts of the triangular entry pictured in Figs. D.10,
0.11, and 0.12 require only small-diameter, short
poles. Triangular entries of this type were un-
damaged by I-kiloton blast effects at the 20-psi
overpressure range" and by0.2-kiloton blast effects at
50 psi. This type of entry and its blast door (also
triangular and made of short poles) can be used with
a wide variety of expedient blast shelters and should
withstand megaton blast effects at 25 psi. Therefore,
their construction isdescribed in considerable detail.
• The horizontal part of a triangular entry: If
the Chinese "Man"Sheltershown in Fig. 0.9 ismade
without excavating the unshored lower trench that
forms its earth seats, it will serve as a horizontal,
shored crawlway-entry affording blast protection up
to at least the 25-psi overpressure range. Two
horizontal entries, one at each end of the shelter,
should be provided. Each entry should be 10 feet
long. This length is needed to reduce the amount of
initial nuclear radiation reaching the blast shelter
room while assuring adequate through-ventilation.
The outer part of such a horizontal entry is pictured
in the background of Fig. 0.10.
• The vertical part of a triangular entry: The
lower section of the vertical part is made in a similar
manner to the horizontal shelter shown in Fig. 0.9.
Figure 0.10 shows 41/2-foot horizontal poles (I)
forming a "V", with one end of each pole laid on top
of the adjacent lower pole. The other ends of these
poles (I) are pressed against the two pairs of vertical
posts (2). (After this photo was taken, the tops of
these two pairs of vertical posts were sawed off as
Fig. 0.10. Uncompleted lower section of a vertical triangular entry.ORNL-DWG 78·14675
4" AND 5" DIA
SPACER
BLOCKS
OF 8-12 in.
LONG
POLES
CONSTRUCTION OF THE
PART OF THE VERTICAL
ENTRY OPPOSITE THE
CRAWLWAY OPENING
5·ft-LONG
HORIZONTAL
ENTRYWAY
OF CHINESE II
SHELTER
6 ft 6 in.
OUTSIDE 2 POLES
LARGER DIA AND
LOG·CABIN NOTCHED
_ 6 ft 6 in-, ~
STEP (1 ft-4 in.;
2Y, in. DIAl
SPACED - 1 ft
APART
SPACER POLE
(WIRED TO
ADJACENT POLE)
TOP VIEW
/1'
48 in. COVER
-T
WIRE POSTS
TOGETHER,
TOP AND
BOTTOM
TRENCH
64 in. DEEP
.,'
"
I"
7 ft 6 in. _~~
POLYETHYLENE (_--:--.__-==~ 4 "hI)
-'--~------... --- - -~~-~ -
I
I ,
\!I
',I
iii -
LIMBS
OR BRUSH.
, ,.
"
DIG SLOTS IN SIDE
OF TRENCH FOR
ENDS OF HORIZON-
TAL POLES
SHALLOW DITCH
~ 5ft6in. ~_I
~~~AYTRENCH ~
VIEW LOOKING INTO SHELTER FROM A-A
Fig. D.11. Lower part of a vertical triangular entry, showing its connection to the horizontal part of
the shelter entry.Fig. D.12. Completed frame of Chinese "Man" Sheltershowing its two ORNL-designed entryways
(one at each end) and triangular blast doors made of poles. Before covering the triangular vertical entries with
earth, tree branches were placed vertically over the sides; the branches then were covered with bedsheets.
Horizontal branches, also covered with bedsheets, were laid over the rest of the shelter frame. After being
covered with earth, this shelter was subjected to I-kiloton blast effects. Multiple earth arching over and around
this yielding structure prevented both the small poles and the bedsheets from being damaged at 20 psi.
shown in Fig. D.II.) The41h-foot horizontal poles (1)
were kept level by the short spacer-poles (3) that were
wired or nailed in place.
Each pair of vertical posts(2) was securely wired
together at top and bottom. The two pairs were held
apart at top and bottom by two horizontal brace-
poles tcenailed in place to frame the rectangular
30-X30-inch crawlway "doorway" between the
vertical entry and the horizontal entry. Only the
upper pole (4) of these two 30-inch-long horizontal
brace-poles is shown.
The two pairs of vertical posts (2) were
positioned so that they pressed against two 7
1h-foot
horizontal poles (5); only the uppermost is shown.
These in turn pressed against the outermost two poles
(6) of the horizontal entry and against the earth in
two slot-trenches dug in the sidewalls of the
excavation. These two 71/2-foot poles (5) should be at
least 6 inches in diameter.
Additional details of the lower section of this
vertical triangular entry are given in Fig. 0.11. If
horizontal poles considerably larger in diameter than
those illustrated are used, fewer poles are required
and strength is increased. However, the space inside
the entry is decreased unless the larger-diameter
horizontal poles that form the "V" are made longer
than 41/2 feet.
As shown on the left in Fig. 0.10, a small,
vertical pole (7) was placed in the small "V" between
the outer ends of the horizontal poles that form the
lower section of the vertical entry. After this photo
was taken, a second small, vertical pole was
positioned in the adjacent large "V", inside the entry.
These two poles (7) were then tightly wired together
so as to make a strong, somewhat yielding, outer-
corner connection of the horizontal poles (I)-in the
same way that the tops of the side-wall poles ofthe
Chinese "Man" Shelter are bound together.
The upper section of the vertical part of this
entry (the section above the tops of the two pairs of
vertical posts shown in Fig. 0.10 and Fig. 0.11) is
made by overlapping the ends ofits nearly horizontal
poles (Fig. 0.12). These poles [marked with a (1) in
Fig. 0.10] were each 4 feet 6 inches long and varied
uniformly in diameter from about 21/2 inches just
above the two pairs of wired-together posts, to 4-inch
diameters just below the triangular door frame of
poles. The triangular-shaped blast door was hingedto and closed against this door frame. The hinges
were strips cut from worn auto tires, to be described
shortly.
The upper section isformed by laying poles in a
triangular pattern, ends crossing at the angles, with
large ends and small ends placed so that the poles are
as nearly horizontal as is practical. Each of its three
corners is held together by strong wires that tightly
bind an outside and an inside small vertical pole, in
the same manner as the top of the Chinese "Man"
Shelter (shown in Fig. 0.9) is secured. (Instead of
No.9 soft steel wire, rope or twisted strips of strong
fabric could be used.)
Before starting to install the upper section of a
vertical triangular entry, the three outermost of the
six small vertical poles thatwillhold the three corners
together should be connected temporarily with three
small horizontal poles. Connect them at the height of
the door frame planned for the triangular blast door,
and space them so as to be the same size as this door'
frame.
Next, all the horizontal poles should be laid out
on the ground in the order of their increasing
diameters. The triangular entry then should be
started with the smallest poles at the base, with
increasingly large-diameter poles used toward the
top-so that the three pairs of small vertical poles will
press securely against all the horizontal side poles of
the entry.
To prevent the negative overpressure("suction")
phase of the blast from yanking out and carrying
away the blast door and the upper part of the vertical
entry to which it is hinged, the uppermost 4 or 5
horizontal poles of each of the three sides of the
vertical entry should be wired or tied securely
together. Rope or strips of strong cloth can be used if
strong wire is not available.
Before placing earth around this lightly con-
structed blast-protective entry, the vertical walls
must be covered to a thickness of about 6inches with
a yielding, crushable covering of limbs, brush, or
innerspring mattresses. Limbs or brush should be
placed in three layers, with the innermost layer at
right angles to the underlying poles. The yielding
thickness then is covered with strong cloth, such as
50% dacron bedsheets, or two thicknesses of 4-mil
polyethylene film. This outermost covering keeps
loose earth or sand from filling spaces inside the
yielding layer or running into the entry. Thus
protected, this vertical entry should be undamaged
by 25-psi blast effects of megaton weapons.
A vertical blast-protective entry can also be
made like a strong box, using 2-inch-thick boards.
Such entries afford blast protection up to 50 psi if
made as small as shown here and protected with
yielding materials such as a 6-inch-thick layer of
brush covered with strong cloth.
j
~22in. ~
.S
CD
~
• Install blast doors to keep out airborne blast
waves, blast wind, overpressure, blast-borne debris,
burning-hot dust and air, and fallout.
A fast-rising overpressure of as little as 5 psi will
break some people's eardrums. At overpressures of
15to 20 psi, 50% of the people who are exposed will
have their eardrums broken. However, persons near
a shelter wall may have their eardrums broken by
somewhat. less than half of these unreflected
overpressures. (Any wall may reflect blast waves and
greatly increase overpressures near it.) Broken
eardrums are not serious in normal times, but after a
nuclear attack this injury is likely to be far more
dangerous to persons in crowded shelters without'
effective medical treatment. Lung damage, that can
result from overpressures as low as 10 to 12 psi,
would also be more serious under post-attack
conditions.
A blast door must withstand blast waves and
overpressure. Not only must the door itself be
sufficiently strong to withstand forces at least as great
as those which the shelterwillsurvive, but inaddition
the door frame and the entranceway walls must be
equally as strong. The expedient blast door pictured
in Fig. 0.13 was made of rough boards, each a full 2
inches thick. It had a continuous row of hinges made
of l8-inch-long strips cut from the treads of worncar
tires.
The strips were nailed to the vertical poles on
one side of the vertical entry. These and other details
of construction are shown in Fig. 0.14. Although the
two center boards were badly cracked by the shock
wave and overpressure at the l7-psi range, the doorFig. D.13. Blast door surrounded by 4 blast-
protector logs'that were notched and nailed together.
The wet, mounded soil had been compacted by the
blast but not blown away.
pictured in Fig. D.13 afforded good protection
against all blast effects from a surface explosion of a
million pounds of TNT. In Fig. D.14, note the
essential, strong tie-down attachment of the wires at
the bottom of the vertical entry, to prevent the blast
door from being yanked open by the negative
pressure ("suction'') that follows the overpressure:
Blast doors must be protected against reflected
pressures from blast waves that could strike an edge
of an unprotected door and tearit off its hinges. Note
the blast-protector logs installed around the door
pictured in Fig. D.14. When the door was closed, the
tops of these four logs were about 2 inches higher
than the door, thus protecting its edges on all sides.
The closed door must be prevented from
rebounding like a spring and opening a fraction of a
second after being bowed down by overpressure, or
from being opened and perhaps torn off its hinges by
the partial vacuum ("suction") that follows the
overpressure phase. Figure D.14 gives the details of
such a hold-down system for a blast door. Note that
near the bottom of the vertical entry the 6 strong
wires must encircle a horizontal pole that isflattened
on one side and nailed to the vertical wall poles with
at least a dozen 6-inch (60-penny) nails. Blast tests up
to the 53-psi overpressure range have proved that this
hold-down system works.'
Figure D.l5 shows a blast door made of 5
thicknesses of 3/4-inch exterior plywood, well glued
and nailed together with 41/2-in. nails at 4-in.
spacings. This door was protected by 4 blast-
protector logs, each 8 feet long and about 8 inches in
diameter. The logs were notched, nailed together,
and surrounded with earth. For protection against
ignition by' the thermal pulse from an explosion,
exposed wood and rubber should be coated with
thick whitewash (slaked lime) or mud, or covered
with aluminum foil.
An equally strong blast door and the door base
upon which itcloses canbe made of poles. Ifpoles are
fresh-cut, they are easy to work with ax and saw.
Figure D.16 shows the best blast-tested design. This
door also had a continuous row of hinges made from
worn auto tire treads. The pole to which the hinges
were attached was 7 inches in diameter after peeling
and had been flattened on its top and outersides. The
two other poles of the equal-sided triangle were 8
inches in diameter and had been flattened with an ax
on the bottom, top,and inner sides. The three poles
were each 55 inches long. They were notched and
spiked together with 60-penny nails so that the door
would close snugly on its similarly constructed base
made of three stout poles. Other poles, at least 7
inches in diameter before being hewn so that they
would fit together snugly, were nailed side-by-sideon
top of the three outer poles.
Many Americans have axes and would beable to
cut poles, but not manyknow how to usean ax to hew
flat, squaresides on a pole or log. This easily acquired
skill is illustrated by Fig. D.17. The worker should
first fasten the pole down by nailing two small poles
to it and to other logs on the ground. Figure D.l7
shows a pole thus secured. When hewing a flat side,
the worker stands with his legs spread far apart, and
repeatedly moves his feet so that he can look almost
straight down at where his ax head strikes. First,
vertical cuts with a sharp ax are made about 3 or 4
inches apart and at angles of about 45° to the surface
of the pole, for the length ofthe pole. These multiple
cuts should be made almost as deep as is needed to
produce a flat side of the desired width. Then the
worker, again beginning at the starting end, should
cut off long strips, producing a flat side.,WIRE SAFETY LOOP
HOOKED OYER 3 TO4-io,
DIAM SAFETY POST
FIRST EACH CAR-TIRE HINGE
IS NAILED TO DOOR WITH SIX
16-PENNY NAILS (CLINCHED).
THEN A 2X6-io BOARD IS
NAILED OYER HINGES WITH
40-PENNY NAILS (~L1NCHED)
SIMPLER FRAME CORNER,
REOUIRING THREE 60·PENNY
NAILS
PUSH BOTTOM OF OPEN DOOR AWAY
FROM ENTRYWAY 50 IT RESTS ON HINGES,
TO MAKE RAPID CLOSING POSSIBLE.
ALL NAILS BENT OYER AND
CLINCHED
SHDRT SECURITY-CDRD TIED
TO PROP-STICK.
~,"'~4=:=:=_'TWOSTRANDS NO 9 WIRE.
~ FOUR STRANDS NO 9 WIRE.
WIRE BINDING AT "v"OF
BRIDLE 411 BELOW CDNNEC-
II--=--.&.Jil.'-- TIONS TO DDOR.
-:
,/
/
BLAST DOOR
SHOWING WIRE HOLD-DOWN
BRIDLE AND PROP-STICK.
~
TOP OF PROTECTOR-LOGS
2·in. ABOYE TOP OF CLOSED
. DOOR.
CROSS SECTION
SHOWING HINGE OFF-SET AND BLAST
DOOR-SHOWN IN SAFETY POSITION.
STICK DRAIN UNDER PROTECTOR ~~~~~~~il;1LOGS - BUNDLE OF CLEAN STICKS' I
WITH PLASTIC WRAPPED AROUND', \ I
OUTSIDE, "" ,:,,11f----------t." OUTSIDE 12ln. OF EACH YERTICAL
~ , 'i, '" POLE IS FLATTENED FOR HINGE,
-e 1 '" ~1~~~~~;%~I~~T~E~'~~LE.
WIRE SAFETY
LOOP
BOARDS
8- 2X6-io X4ftO-lo,LONG BOARDS FOR 10psi
OVERPRESSURE (ROUGH LUMBER PREFERRED),
I
i\
I
,
.'
, I
I
I'
CORD TIED TO LINK AND /!0:\'-SUPPORTING LOAD-BINDER IN
,~'fWe~"n"lr'"~,~". \.! ,LOOP OF EASILY
LINKAGE BETWEEN BROKEN STRING'TO
UPPER HOOK ANO HOLD HANDLE UP IN
SWIYEL TAPED OR MAXIMUM TIGHTENING
BOUND TO STIFFEN POSITION.
AND HOLD HOOK , )
iFACING WIRE LOOP
LOWER HOOK TAPED ;
OR BOUND TOLOWER ~WIRE HOOP
-.
PROP-STICK
BLAST DOOR
SHOWN IN READY POSITION
~
11 0 '0
BRIDLE SPACE ~ ,
1----24 \\"1.
I
B-.o, DIAM LOGS OF BLAST-
PROTECTION FRAME ARE
PLACED 5 TO 6'0, OUTSIDE
ENTRYWAY.
PULL-CORD TIED
TO PROP-STICK
5-10 DIAM POLE,FLAT· .
TEN ONE SIDE BY "~Il"~;}REMOYING 11/2 on AND.Ii
NAIL WITH TWO 60·
PENNY NAILS TO " .....--'-
EACH VERTICAL POLE. •
WIRE LOOP AT END 0
8 STRANDS OF NO 9
WIRE CONTINUING
INTO WIRE 'y" 8RIDLE .
6 STRANDS OF NO, 9
SOFT STEEL WIRE. .L--'-Hrl"""--"
8 STRANDS OF NO 9 WIRE
(FOR ANY 8LAST OVER-
PRESSURE). _
BOTTOM OF ENTRYWAY
Fig. 0.14. Expedient blast door that can be closed and secured in 4 seconds. Four
seconds would be too little time if the shelter is at the 15-psi overpressure range
from a 550-kiloton or smaller warhead - typical of the 1987 Soviet ICBM
arsenal. (See the last paragraph on page 255.) However, this door closure is still
the best blast-tested expedient means to secure a closed blast door.Fig. D.15. Tire-strip hinges nailed to an ex-
pedient, 4-inch-thick blast door made of plywood,
designed to withstand 50-psiblasteffects ofvery large
weapons and undamaged by blast at the 53-psi
range.
Fig. D.16. Blast-tested triangular blast door
made of hand-hewn pine poles, notched and nailed
together. This door closed on a triangular pole base
that is concealed in this photo by two of the three
blast-protector logs that also withstood 53-psi blast
effects.
Fig. D.17. Hewing flat sides on a pole with a
sharp ax.
To hew a second flat side at right angles to the
first side, rotate the pole 90°, secure it again, and
repeat-as pictured in Fig. D.17.
• Provide blast closures for an adequate ventila-
tion system. The following two expedient closure
systems permit adequatevolumes ofventilatingair to
be pumped through a shelter:
1. Install two blastdoors, one on eachend ofthe
shelter, designed to be left open until the extremely
bright light from a large blast is seen. Figure D.14
shows a door held open by a prop-stick that can be
yanked away by the attached pull-cord. While
propped open, one blast door serves as an extremely
low-resistance air-intake opening, and the other
serves as an air-exhaust opening. A large KAP can
pump air at the rate ofseveral thousand cubicfeet per
minute through such open doors.
When an attack is expected, each pull-cord
should be held by a shelter occupant who stays ready
at all times to yank out the prop-stick as soon as he
sees the light of an explosion. After the door has
fallen closed, the loop at the end of its wire bridle is
close to the upper hook ofthe load-binder and at the
same height (Fig. D.14). The person who doses the
doorshould quicklyhook the upper hook ofthe load-
binder into the wire loopand pull down on the handle
ofthe load-binder. The door will then be-tightlyshut.
(Sources during an emergency would be the millions
of load-binders owned by truckers and farmers.)
At distances from a large explosion where blast
wave and overpressure effects are not destructive
enough to smash most good expedient blast shelters,
there is enough time between the instant the light of
the explosion is seen and the arrival ofits blast wave
for an alert person to shut and securely fasten a well-
designed blast door. The smaller the explosion and
the greater the overpressure range, the shorter the
warning time. Thus at the IS-psi overpressure range
from a I-megaton surface burst (1.5 miles), the blast
wave arrives about 2.8 seconds after the light;
whereas at the 10-psi overpressure range from a 1-
megaton surface burst (1.9 miles), the blast wave
arrives about 4.5 seconds after the light. For a 20-
megaton surface burst, the warning time at the IS-psi
range is about 8 seconds, and at the 30-psi over-
pressure range, about 4 seconds. Experiments have
shown that even people who react quite slowly can
close and secure this door within 4 seconds after
seeing a spotlight shine on the door without warning.2. Build a vertical air shaft next to the outermost
side of each vertical entry, with an Overlapping-Flaps
Blast Valve (see Fig. 0.18) connecting each entry to its
air shaft, as shown in Fig. 0.19. These air shafts and
blast valves permit forced ventilation to be maintained
when the two blast doors are closed. Figure 0.18 illus-
trates the construction of a fast-closing expedient blast
valve, a design that wasundamaged bythe 65-psishock
wave and other effects produced by the explosion of a
million pounds of TNT. When blast-tested in a shock-
tube at 100-psi,the flaps were undamaged; they closed
in 6/ 1000of a second (0.006 sec.). This isas fast as the
best factory-made blast valves close.
QRNL DWG 73-2229A
DIRECTION OF
ENTERING
BLAST :
n
O.~·;
Fig. 0.18. Overlapping-Flaps Blast Valve,
made of boards, plywood, and strips cut from the
treads of worn car tires.
To withstand 50 psi, the load-bearing "2-inch"
boards (actually 11/2 inches thick) of the valve should
be at least 6 inches wide, if the I-in.-high air openings
are each made 12 in. wide, measured between two
vertical poles of a shelter entry. See Fig. 0.19, that
gives the dimensions of a valve that has been blast
tested.' Note that there are 5 inches of solid wood at
each end of each I-in.-high air opening. Ifthere are 5
such air openings to a valve, a properly installed KAP
(Appendix B) can pump air'at about 125cubic feet
ORNL-OWG 78-14429R
TOP OF BLAST
VALVESHOULD
BE AT LEAST
3 ft 8ElOWTHE
BLAST DOOR
ONENTRY
BRACE.->ARDS
PRESSING AGAINST
THE FACE OF THE
VALVE HOUSING
TO KEEP NEGATIVE
PRESSURE
FROM "SUCKING"
OUT THE WHOLE
VALVE
VERTICAL AIRDUCT
SHOULD EXTEND 2
/: OR 3ltBELOW
,/ BOTTOMOF BLAST
VALVE ANDPREFERABLY
-.;.~.. BELOWTHE BOTTOM OF
==~~- THEVERTICAL ENTRY
Fig:D.19. Installation ofa 50-psi Overlapping-
Flaps Blast Valve in such a way that it will not be
blown into a shelter by the blast overpressure, nor
pulled out by the following negative pressure
("suction'') phase.
per minute (125 cfrn) through a shelter equipped with
such valves. This ventilation rate isamplefor at least 40
people in cold weather. Except in hot and humid
weather, a constant air supply of about 10 cfrn per
shelter occupant is enough to maintain tolerable
conditions during continuous shelter occupancy for
many days.
If a factory-made blower capable of pumping
more than 100 cfrn is available, use it. Such a hand-
operated' blower can pump against mucn':mgnerau
flow resistances than a KAP can. It can pump its
full-rated volume of outdoor air through a shelter
equipped with two Overlapping-Flaps Blast Valves,
one ateachend of the shelterandeach with only
2 air openings-providing a total of 24 square
inches of openings per valve. Equally or more
effective is a homemakeable Plywood Double-
Action Piston Pump, made and operated as
described in Appendix E.
Remember that a pressure of 7200 pounds
pushes against each square foot of the exposed face ofa blast valve when it is subjected to a 50-psi blast
overpressure. Also keep in mind that the "suction" that
follows can exert an outwardly directed force of up to
700 pounds per square foot on the valve face and can
yank it out of position unless it is securely installed.
Figure 0.19shows how to securely install a blast valve.
(Merely nailing a blast valve in its opening will not
enable it to withstand severe blast forces.)
Note in Figure D.19 that an opening is
shown between the back edge of the uppermost
board of the Overlapping-Flaps BlastValve and
the adjacenthorizontalpoleofthe verticalentry.
Both this opening and the similar opening next
to thelowermostboardoftheBlastValve should
be closed off with a stout board, to prevent blast
from going through these openings and on into
a vertical entry and the shelter room.
Thetop ofan airshaftshouldbe a few inches
higher than the earth piled around it, as are the
tops of the vertical entries of the Small-Pole
Shelter illustrated in Figure A.3.1 on page 174.
To minimize the amount of rain that may fall
into an air shaft, a shed-like, open-sided minia-
ture roof should be placed over it, a few inches
aboveitstop.Theroofcanbe lightlyconstructed,
since it will be blown away by a severe blast.
• Minimize aboveground construction and the
mounding of shielding earth. At high overpressure
ranges, the shock wave and the blast-wind drag can
wreck an aboveground shelter entry. For example, the
5-ft-high earth mound over a shelter built with its pole
roof at ground level was moved enough by l-kiloton
air-blast effects at the 53-psi overpressure range to
break one of the poles ofa blast-doorframe. The forces
of a I-megaton explosion at the same overpressure
range would have operated 10 times as long, and
probably would havesmashed the vertical entryways of
this shelter. Whenever practical, a blast shelter should
be built far enough belowground so that the top of its
shieldingearthcover isat ground level.Avoidingabove-
ground construction and earth mounds also greatly
reduces the chances of damage from blast-hurled,
heavydebris, such astree trunksand piecesof buildings.
Dry earth, steeply mounded over a shelter which is
subjected to blast winds from a big explosion, will be
mostly blown away. However, blast-wind"scouring"of
wet earth isnegligible. The blast winds from a l-kiloton
explosionat the 31-psioverpressurerange scoured away
17inches of dry, sandy soil mounded at a slope of 32°.
If it is impractical to build a blast shelter with its
roof belowground, good protection can be attained by
moundingeven dry earthat slopes not steeper than 10°.
• Provide adequate shielding against initial nuclear
radiation. Good expedient blast shelters require a
greater thickness of earth cover than is needed on good
fallout shelters, for these reasons:
* Blast shelters should also protect against initial
nuclear radiation emitted by the fireball. This
radiation is reduced by half when it penetrates
about 5inches of packed earth (as compared to
a halving-thickness of only about 3Y2 inches of
earth against radiation from fallout).
* The initial radiation, in some areas where good
blast shelters will survive, can be much greater
than the fallout radiation is likely to be.
* Initial nuclear radiation that comes through
entryways ismore difficult to attenuate(reduce)
than fallout radiation. Therefore, longer entry-
ways or additional right-angle turns must be
provided.
For these reasons, good blast shelters should be
covered with at least 4ft ofwell-packed, average-weight
earth, or 5 ft of unpacked or light earth. (A 3-ft
thickness gives excellent protection against radiation
from fallout.)
A 50-PSI SMALL-POLE SHELTER
This expedient blast shelterisdescribed indetail to
enable the reader to build this model. The details will
help him better understand the design principles of
other expedient blast shelters that are capable of
preventing injuries from blast effects severe enough to
destroy all ordinary buildings and kill the occupants.
Blast tests and calculations have indicated that the
Small-Pole Shelter described and illustrated in Appen-
dix A.3 willafford protection againstall weaponeffects
at overpressureranges up to 50psithatare produced by
an explosion of 1 megaton, or larger, provided the
shelter is:
• Made with horizontal entryways each .with
ceilings no higher than 7 ft, 2 in., no wider than 3 ft,
and each at least 10 ft long-to lessen the radiation
coming through the 'entries (see Fig. 0.20). Lower
and narrower entryways would give betterprotection
but would increase the time required for entry.
• Constructed with a floor ofpoles thatare4in. or
more in diameter, laid side-by-side, with the wall
poles resting on the floor poles. The ground shock
and earth pressures at a depth of 10 ft or more
resulting from an overpressure on the surface of more
than about 35 psi, ifcaused by a largeexplosion, may
destabilize and squeeze earth upward into the shelter
through an unprotected earth floor. The Small-Pole
Shelterdescribed in Appendix A.3 has an earth floor.
• Installed in an excavation about 13 feet deep,
with the shelter's vertical entrances appropriately
increased in height so that the blast doors are only
about one foot above the original ground level.
To prevent possibly life-endangering cave-
inofthe 13-foot-deep trenchthatwas dugfor the
blast testing of this model shelter, the trench
walls were sloped about 45 degrees. The shelter
was built as a braced, free-standing structure,
and then covered. During a crisis it would be
impractical to safely excavate a deep trench
with steeplyslopingwalls and then safely build
a shelter in it. A 13-foot-deep trench is usually
too deep to dig by hand-c-especta.Ily since to dig
itwith safelyslopingwallsrequirestheremoval
of a large amount of earth.BLAST DOOR
43/4 in. THICK
PLYWOOD BLAST PROTECTOR
LOG
\
\
(.:J >-\Z a: , ~.
- ~.' ......
...J Z ',~
Ww '"uw
.0c-.- ~
N '
,~
~M
.... u.o
I,,,
I,,
I'
.-,'"
URNL-DWG 78-18835
9 in.
Fig. 0.20. Entryway of Small-Pole Blast Shelter shielded against initial nuclear radiation. This
sketch is a simplified vertical section through the centerline of one end of the shelter.
• Made with 4 rectangular horizontal braces in
each vertical entry, in addition to the ends of the two
long, ladder-like braces. The detailed drawings in
Appendix A show such braces. The lowest rectangu-
lar brace should be positioned 31/2 feet above the
flooring at the bottom of the vertical entry (see Fig.
0.20).
• Equipped with blast doors each made of5sheets
of 3 4-inch exterior plywood (see Fig. 0.15) bonded
with resin glue and nailed together with 41/2 in. nails.
The nails should be driven on 4-in. spacingsand their
protruding ends should be clinched (bent over). The
blast doors must be secured against being yanked
open by negative pressure ("suction") by securing
them with a strong wire bridle (see Fig.· D.14), and
with the lower, fixed wirestrongly connected nearthe
bottom of the entry to all ofthe vertical poles on one
side, as shown in Fig. D.14.
• Provided with an adequate ventilation pump
and with ventilation openings protected against blast
by expedient blast-valves (Fig. 0.18) installed in the
vertical entries as shown in Fig. D.19, to protect the
air-intake and the air-exhaust openings. (Ventilation
openings should be as far as practical from buildings
and combustible materials. Manually closed ventila-
tion openings are NOT effective at the 50-psi
overpressure range of mostweapons, because there is
insufficient time to close them between the arrival ofthe warning light from the explosion and the arrival
of the blast wave.)
• Made with the roof poles covered by a yielding
layer of brush or limbs about 6 inches thick, or of
innerspring mattresses. This yielding layer in turn
should be covered with bedsheets or other strong
cloth, to increase the effectiveness of protectiveearth
arching. Brush or limbs should be laid in 3layers with
sticks of the middle layer perpendicular to those of
the other two layers.
• Covered with 5 feet of earth, sloped no steeper
than 100.
• Provided with additional shielding materials in
the entryways, as shown in Fig. 0.20. Such shielding
would be needed to prevent occupantsfrom receiving
possibly incapacitating or fatal doses of initial
nuclear radiation through the entrywaysat the 50-psi
overpressure range, if the shelter is subjected to the
effects of a weapon that isone megaton, or larger, in
explosive yield.
Damp earth serves better for neutron shielding
material than dry earth and can be substituted for
water as shielding material if sufficient water
containers are not available. (At the 50-psi over-
pressure range from explosions smaller than one
megaton, the entry and shielding shown in Fig. 0.20
may not provide adequate protection against initial
nuclear radiation.) .
When the shelter is readied for rapid occupancy,
the shelter-ventilating KAP is secured against the
ceiling. and the bags of earth in the doorway (under
the KAP) are removed. Persons entering the shelter
would stoop to go under the platform adjacent to the
vertical entry. This platform is attached to vertical
wall-poles of the horizontal entry and supports
shielding waterand earth. When all except the person
who will shut and secure the blast door are inside the
shelter room, occupants should quickly begin to
place bags of earth in the doorway. When the attack
has begun, the whole doorway can be closed with
bags of earth or other dense objects until ventilation
is necessary.
The entries of other types of blastshelterscan be
shielded in similar ways.
• Protected against fire by being built sufficiently
distant from buildingsand flammable vegetation and
by having its exposed wood covered. For maximum
expedient protection against ignition by the thermal
radiation from a large explosion, all exposed wood
should be free ofbark, coated with wet mud or damp
slaked lime (whitewash), and covered with aluminum
sheet metal or foil to reflect heat. (Most of the
thermal radiation from an explosion that was
I megaton or larger would reach the 50-psi over-
pressure range after the blast wave had arrived and
had torn the expedient protective coverings from the
wood. However, as has been observed in megaton
nuclearweapon tests, the dustcloud first produced by
the popcorning effect and later by the blast winds
would screen solid wood near the ground so
effectively against thermal radiation that itwould not
be ignited, provided it had been initially protected as
described above.)
PRECAUTIONS FOR OCCUPANTS
OF BLAST SHELTERS
Although a wellconstructed blastsheltermay be
undamaged at quite high overpressure ranges, its
occupants may be injured or killed as a result of rapid
ground motions that move the whole shelter several
inches in a few thousandths of a second. Rapid
ground motions are not likely to cause serious
injuries unless the shelterisinan area subjected to 30-
psi or greaterblast effects. To prevent possible injury,
when the occupants of high-protection blast shelters
are expecting attack they should avoid:
• Having their heads close to the ceiling. The "air
slap" of the air-blast wave may push down the earth
and an undamaged shelter much more rapidly thana
person can fall. If one's head were to be only a few
inches from the ceiling, a fractured skull could result.
• Leaning against a wall, because it may move
very rapidly, horizontally as well as vertically.
• Sitting or standing on the floor, because ground
shock may cause the whole shelter (including the
floor) to rise very fast and injure persons sitting or
standing on the floor. The safest thingto do isto sit or
lie in a securely suspended, stronghammock or chair,
or on thick foam rubber such as that ofa mattress, or
on a pile of small branches.
In dry areas or inadry expedientshelter, ground
shock may produce choking dust. Therefore, shelter
occupants should be prepared to cover their faces
with towels or other cloth, or put on a mask. If an
attack is expected, they should keep such protective
items within easy reach.Appendix E
How to Make and Use a Homemade
Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump and Filter
THE :-iEED
\.entilating pumps-mostly centrifugal blowers capable ofoperat-
ing against quite high resistance toairflow-are used to force outdoor
air through most high-protection-factor fallout shelters and through
almost all permanent blastshelters. Low-pressure ventilatingdevices,
including- ordinary bladed fans and homemade air pumps such as
KAPs and Directional Fans, cannot force enough air through a
permanent shelter's usual air-supply system consistingof pipes, or of
pipes with a blast valve, a filter, and the valves needed to maintain a
positive pressure within the shelter.
Manually cranked centrifugal blowers, or blowers that can either
be powered by an electric motor or be hand-cranked, are the
preferred meansof ventilating permanentshelters from Switzerland
toChina. The main disadvantagesofefficientcentrifugal blowersare:
I. They are quite expensive. Forexample, in 1985agood American
hand-cranked blower. that pumpsonly about50cubic feet per minute
150cfm) through a shelter's pipes, blast valve and filter, retails for
around $250. An excellent foreign blower that enables one man to
pump somewhat larger volumes sells for about twice as much.
2. Not enough centrifugal blowers could be manufactured quickly
enough to equip all shelters likely to be built during a recognized
crisis threatening nuclear attack, and lasting for weeks to several
months.
Therefore, there is need for an efficient. manually operated, low-
cost ventilating pump that:
I. Can pump adequate volumes of outdoor air through shelter-
ventilating systems that have quite high resistances-up to several
inches water gauge pressure differential.
2. WiIIbeserviceableafter at leastseveral weeksofcontinuous use.
3. Can be built at low cost in home workshops by many Americans,
using only materials available in most towns.
4. Could be made by the millions in thousands of shops allover the
V.S..for mass production during a recognized prolonged crisis, using
only plywood and other widely available materials.
To produce such a shelter ventilating pump, during the past 20
years I have worked intermittently designing and building several
types of homemade air pumps. However, until I was traveling in
China as an official guest in October 1982and saw a wooden double-
action piston pump being used, I did not conceive or come across a
design that I was able to develop into a shelter-ventilating pump that
meets all of the requirements outlined above. Now I have made and
tested a simple homemade Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump,
described below, that satisfies these requirements. Three other
persons have used successively improved versionsofthese instructions
tomake this model.and several others have contributed improvements.
HOW A PLYWOOD DOUBLE-ACTION PISTON PUMP
WORKS
Fig. 1picturesthe box-liketest model described inthese instructions.
Fig. I. Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump, with manometer
attached for tests.
Fig, 2 illustrates a vertical section through a slightly improved
model, and shows the 12x12-in. plywood piston being pushed from
right to left, causing air from the outdoors to be "sucked" down.the
open air-supply duct in the top of the pump, then down to the right
through the open valve in the airtight frame (that is above and near
the right end of the PARTITION), and on down into the lower-
pressure area behind the leftward-moving piston,
Because the air to the right of the leftward-moving piston is at a
lower pressure than the air in the shelter room, the exhaust valves in
the front end (the handle endtof the pump are held closed,
Duringthis halfofthe pumpingcycle, the higher-pressureair inthe
partofthe pump'ssquare"cylinder"tothe leftoftheleftward-moving
piston opens the air-exhaust valves in the back end of the pump, and
fresh air isforced out into the shelterroom. The higher-pressureairto
the left of the valve in the airtight frame (that is above the left end of
the PARTITION) keeps this valve closed, while the lower-pressure
air to the right of this valve helps keep it closed.
When the piston is pulled tothe right, all ofthe valvesshownclosed
are quicklyopened, and all shown open are quicklyclosed. Then fresh
air is forced into the shelter room through the opened exhaust valves
in the front end of the pump.
w-Jo
Z
<t
J:
0:0:WwIDa.
ID~
::J::)
O:ID
6x6-IN. DUCT, INSIDE
-------~~~ ~
....r- ----' ---- ----- -----
~ 4- 1-1t.f-3 -1 .---.---.,
~
0:0: .-------.. Ww
-------
ID a.
~
ID ~
-----
::J ::J
O:ID ~
3~ 1~..t----------32.IN.
Fig. 2. Vertical Section of the Double-Action Piston Pump showing its square piston being pushed to the left.Table 2. Volumetric Efficiencies of Double-Action Piston Pump
Operated by One Man. .
Table 1. Comparison of Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump with
Temet OyCentrifugal Blower.'
PRES. STROKES
DIFF, PER
(in. w.g.) MINUTE cfm EFFICIENCY
4.0 36 122 84.0%
2.6 45 160 89.0%
0.7 51 188 92.0%
0.4 54 202 94.0%
0.2 55 208 94.5%
0.18
0.15
HORSE-
POWER
90
172
208
134
182
300
CUBIC
FEET
PER
MINUTE
2.0
4.3
2.3
2.3
4.9
4.3
PRES.
D1FF.
(in. w.g.)
TYPE OF
PUMP
used (as compared to the cfm pumped by this very good centrifugal
blower) is typical of the reduced effectiveness of even the best
centrifugal blowers at high pressure differences.
In areas devastated by a nuclear explosion, the typical very
dusty conditions are likely to result in filters soon becoming dirty
and higher in resistance to airflow. Then the greatereffectiveness
of a piston pump for ventilating a shelter with a high-resistance
air-supplysystem will be even more important than when its filter
is clean.
The horsepower requirements of my pump have not yet been
measured. However, basedon the calculated air pressureon the 12
x 12-in. piston of 22.3Ibs. when the pressure difference was 4.3 in.
w.g, (0.155 psi), when two pumpers were making 52 strokes
(cycles) per minute while pumping 182 cfm, the horsepower
delivered was about 0.14 HP without allowing for friction and the
losses of power due to reversals in the directions of piston
movements. Iestimate thatthe actual horsepower delivered by the
two pumpers (I, a 69 year old with a stiff back in 1983, and a
15-year-old boy) was somewhat less than 0.2 HP. A man in good
condition can work for hours delivering 0.1 HP.
When comparing machines powered by human muscles, what
muscles are used and how they are used are often as important as
are the horsepower requirements. Leg muscles are more efficient
and are much stronger than arm muscles. Arm muscles are used
much_more in cranking a blower than in pushing and pulling the
piston of a properly designed reciprocating piston pump back and
forth horizontally. See Fig. 3. Ifthis double-action piston pump is
placed at a height above the floor so that its handle is approxi-
mately at the height of a standing operator's elbows, then the
operator can do most of the work with his legs. See Fig. 3. He
efficiently moves his body back and forth for over a foot, while
moving his hands and forearms horizontally for slightly less than a
foot relative to his body. To deliver the same horsepower by
cranking a blower uses less efficient muscles inefficiently, and is
much more tiring.
As shown in Table 2, the volumetric efficiency of my best model
is good for a shelter-ventilating pump. The volumetric efficiency
of a piston pump (a positive displacement pump) is found by
dividing the cfrn actually pumped by the theoretical maximum
cfm at the same pumping rate and the same pressure difference,
assumingall piston strokesare full length, that all valvesopen and
close instantaneously, and that there is no leakage. Table 2 shows
that the greater the pressuredifference, the lower the efficiency-
as one would expect, because of increased leakage.
Double-Action
Piston Pump
one man
two men
Temet Oy
Centrifugal Blower
two men
Double-Action
Piston Pump
one man
two men
Temet Oy
Centrifugal Blower
two men
Fig. 3. Pump with Homemade Filter (20 x 20 x 8-inches inside
dimensions) connected airtighton top of the pump's6x6-inch
air-intake duct.
The best centrifugal blowers that I have seen or heard about are
those manufactured by a Finnish company, Temet.Oy, (I cranked a
Temet Oy blower in an Israeli shelter used for testing ventilation
equipment; the Finnish centrifugal blower was better than Swiss,
German and captured Russian blowersalso undergoingtests.)There-
fore, in Table 1a few ofthe volumetric testsof my best model Plywood
Double-Action Piston Pump (powered by one and two men) arc
compared with performance data furnished by Temet Oy for its
centrifugal blower when cranked by two men. I bave converted
Temet Oy's metric units into the common American units.
InTable 1the pressure difference of 4.3 inches water gauge is the
resistance to airflow that Temet Oy realistically gives as typical of a
well designed shelter ventilation system of pipes, valves and blower
plus a Chemical Biological Radiological (CBR) filter. Temet Oygives
2.0 inches water gauge as typical of the same ventilation system
with only a low resistance dust filter. The much larger volume
pumped by the Double-Action Piston Pump when a CBR filter is
PERFORMANCE TESTS
The volumetric and durability tests summarized below are proof
that this homemade Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump is better
than most hand-cranked centrifugal blowers for supplying a shelter
with outdoor air through typical air-intake and exhaust pipes-
especially when the ventilation system contains a filter and/or blast
valves. The filters that give the best protection, Chemical Biological
Radiological (CBR) Filters, have quite high resistance to airflow, as
docommercial blastvalves thatclosequicklyenough to protectfilters,
1. Volumetric tests, Because the rapidly pulsating airflows into
and outofa piston pumpare very hard to measure accurately with an
air velocity meter, I made an inflatablecylindrical bagof2-mil(0.002
inch) polyethylene film; the fully inflated volume of this bag was 256
cubic feet. The bag was suspended on a horizontal strong cord
running through its length. A short tube 62 inches in circumference
connected the back end of the pump (that is opposite the operator's
end) to the suspended bag. Bag and pump were in a below ground
shelter that normally has essentially motionless air. See Fig. 1.
Since this type of pump exhausts equal volumes of air from each of
its two ends, the total cubic feet per minute(cfm) that it pumpsequals
twice the cfm that itexhausts into the shelterfrom oneofits ends. See
Fig. 1.that shows the pumpattached with "C"clampsto a small steel
table and being used to pump air into the 256 cubic foot suspended
bag.
I measured the pressure differences against which the pump was
operated. In a shelter these differences typically are caused by the
resistance toairflow in pipes, valves, and a filter. I measured pressure
differences in inches water gauge (l in. w.g. = 0.036 psi) with the
small-tube manometer attached to the side of the pump. To produce
various pressure differences for several tests, I nailed a piece of
plywood over the top of the air-intake duct, so as to produce different
sized openings; in most tests I placed different layers of filter:
materials in a filter box that was fitted airtight over-the 6 x 6-in.
air-supplyductonthe top ofthe pump. See Fig.3.(Thislow-resistance
filter removes practicallyall fallout particlesof wartimeconcern,and
also most infective aerosols that may be used in biological warfare.
See "Making and Using a Homemade Filter Box and Filter", by
Cresson H. Kearny, October 1985.2. Durability tests. Findinga homemakeable method toseal the
moving piston so as to assure at least one month of continuous
efficient pumping was the mostdifficult problem. Various rubber
seals attached to the edges of the piston were unsatisfactory. and
aluminum sheetmetal strips (shaped and attached like the gal-
vanized steel sheetmetal strips used in this model) wore out in less
than a week. even when oiled every 24 hours.
To save money during weeks of continuous durability testing,
the pump was operated by an electric motor that powered a pulley
drive that turned a 2-foot-diameter pulley having an attached
40-in.-Iongsteel pitman with a hinged connection to a horizontally-
sliding bar connected to the handle of the pump's wooden piston
rod. See Fig. 4.
F'ig'. 4. Mechanized Drive Used in Weeks-Long- Durability Tests.
After pumping- for :380 hours (15.8:3 days) at 44 strokes per
minute ag-ainst a pressure differenceof 2.:3in. w.g., the worst worn
spot on any of the 30-gauge steel sheetmetal sealing- strips on the
piston was reduced in thickness from its original 0.0155 in. to
0.0145 in. This worst-spot wear of 0.001 in. is only about a 6%
reduction in thickness. The flap valves functioned as well as when
new. and appeared unworn.
I conclude that this pump would be serviceable after several
months of continuous use-provided it is lubricated after every 24
hours of actual use. as in this durability test. In this test I
lubricated the piston. its "cvlinder's" four walls, and its rod with
Lubriplate :\10. 105, "the original white grease". This non-sticky
"grease-type lubricant" is used extensively, especially to lubricate
internal combustion eng-ines hefore first starting up. Another
builder ofthis model pump found Siloo White Lube, an all-purpose
lithium grease, the best of the lubricants that he tested. Judging
from my prior durability tests, a very lightoil applied daily serves
reasonably well. Ordinary bearing grease is unsatisfactory.
MATERIALS
The following materials (that cost about $65. retail in 1985) are
needed to make and operate the best model of this pump:
Plywood, 3/4-in. exterior: one 4 x 8-ft. sheet (finished on one side,
unwarped).
Plywood, :3/8-in. exterior: 1/4th of a 4 x 8-ft. sheet (finished on one
side: unwarped). (Second choice: 1/4-in. exterior plywood).
Oak board, 3/4 x 1-3/4 in., straight, well seasoned, 4 ft. long, to
make the piston rod. (If oak or other very strong wood is not
available, use a straight fir or pine board.)
Fir or pine board, about 3/4 x 1-3/4 in., 8 ft. long, to make the
piston-rod handle, etc.
28-gauge or lighter galvanized-steel flashing (sold by lumber
yards for roofers), no thicker than 0.016 in.: or galvanized steel
or flashing no thinner than 0.012 in. Or 30 gauge galvanized
steel sheetmetal available in some sheetmetal shops. (Sheet-
metal thicker than 0.016 is not springy enough for making this
pump's near-equivalent of piston rings.) Best to go to a sheet-
metal shop and have:3 stripscut, each 3 in. wide and about:30 in.
long.
Screws, round-headed, zinc-plated wood screws:
22 each of No. 12(2-in. long, 12/32 in. dia.), with flat washers
10each of No. 10 (1-1/2 in. long, with flat washers)
15 each of No.6 (3/4 in. long, with flat washers)
Nails, 4-penny (1-1/2 in.), best cement-coated: 1/4 lb.
Nails, 3-penny (1-1/4 in.). galvanized: 1/4 lb.
Staples (if an oak board for the piston rod is not available), No. 17,
:3/4-in., galvanized)- 1/4 lb.
Tacks, No.6 upholstery, (1/2-in. long): a small container.
Tacks, No.3 upholstery (3/8-in. long): a small container.
Felt, weather stripping, 5/8-in. wide: 10 ft.
Tape, silver duct tape, 2-in. wide: a small roll.
Tape, masking tape, 3/4-in. wide: a small roll.
Adhesive, waterproof: "Liquid Nails", or other all purpose con-
struction adhesive: one approx. l l-oz. tube (for use in caulking
gun).
Epoxy, 5-minute: 2 tubes.
Rubber cement: a small tube.
Sealer (such as polyurethane elear finish. to reduce absorption of
oil or other lubricant of the "cylinder"): 1/2 pint.
Plastie film, transparent storm-window type (such as 4-mil Flex-
O-Glass, by Warp Bros.): 3 sq. ft. .
Grease-type lubricant, an all-purpose motor-breakin lithium
greasesuch as "Siloo White Lube"or "Lubriplate No.5SpaceAge
Lubricant": two approx. 10 oz. tubes.
Inner tube rubber. heavy truck or auto (cut from an old tube): 1sq.
ft.
FUNCTIONAL RELATIONS OF PARTS
Look at Figs. 2, 5, and 6. In Figs. 5 and 6, the lower, fixed partof
the front end is pictured below the piston rod. The piston rod slides
back and forth on-the center of the fixed part of the front end (as
indicated moreclearly in Fig. 7).and in the notch in the removable
part of the front end.
Fig. 5. Front End of the Durability Test Pump, showing the lower
fixed part (below piston rod) and the upper removable
part, that is held by 6 screws with flat washers. Felt
weather-stripping makes the removable part airtight.Fiz. 6. Pump Built by Dale Huber, of Lake City, Florida in his home
workshop, while guided only by the second draft of these
repeatedly improved instructions. The removable part of the
front end has been taken off, to insert the piston into the 12x
12-in."cylinder" under the PARTITION. The plastic flaps of
this pump's flap valves are black: transparent plastic film is
preferred.
~2+- /3-1/2
-r2~
4 --11-1/21-- 4
1
0 0 0
'":::,
It-
-t-
0
0 0~f-
l!?
10
I
... 0 0
4- 0 0'"..L
l!? ~10
~t:>ciJ 0 0
+ f -----SCREW HOLES
Fig. 8. Back End. Only the plywood is shown.
Note that a single plastic-film
flap covers each pair of 2 x 4-in.
valve holes, and that. as shown in
Fig. 2Ithatgivesaside viewofall
six flaps), all flaps open away
from the vertical center-plane of
the pump.
In Fig. 5the removable(upper)
part of the front end is shown in
place, secured bysix round-head
screws with flat washers. In Fig.
7 note the pair of 2 x 4-in. flap-
valve holes above the piston rod.
In Fig. 6.the removable partof
the front end has been removed,
exposing the 26-;n.-long, hori-
zontal PARTITION that serves
as the top of the 12 x 12-in.
"cylinder", in which the piston
can make a 24-in.-maximum-
length stroke. Also see Figs. 2
and 7. Fig. 6alsoshows the piston
while it isbeingremoved and one
ofthe two rubber bumpers(made
ofinner tube rubber)onits piston
rod.
The back end of the "box" is
made of one piece of plywood. as
shown in Fig. 8. The two plastic
flaps of its exhaust valves each
cover two 2 x 4-in. valve holes,
that are positioned the same as
the four valve holes in the front
end.
3/~
..."-10
0
ZW
....
.&
z0a:u,
u,
i
0
.... co"-a: ....
<lQ. -
W
..J ~<D ro
;;
'"0::IEw ~a: eo
<!>
I PISTON ROO HOLE I
I I
I
II I~ I
0 0
"' I,
"' I II I II I II
--+-------
I_1______-- __.l_
1'~'--rH~'~' ...-,
+ 6-3/4
10
ENDS AND TOP 13-1/2
BOTTOM 17-1/2
Fig. 7. Front End (Operator's End) of Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump, The two 4 x 12-in.valve
frames are shown by dashed lines, as is the 12 x 26-in. PARTITION.Fig. 10. Fixed Part of Front End, Unfinished. Only the plywood
is shown.
and note that this TEMPLATE outlines the right halfof the 3-3/4 x
11-1/2-in. plastic-film flap.) Also transfer the dashed tack-line and
mark the ends of the 4 horizontal stop-string lines. Drill 8small holes
through the cardboard at the ends ofthe 4stop-stringlines, sothatyou
can use a pencil to mark these points on plywood. .
b. Useyour TEMPLATE to mark around the 2x4-in. valve holes
in plywood parts: (1) the positions of the ends of each hole's 8 stop-
strings, (2)the rightside-edge and the bottom-edge ofeach flap after
it is attached, and (3) the tack-lines.
c. Drill a 1/16-in. diameter hole through the plywood at each
point marked for an end of a stop-string.
d. With nylon kite string (or other nylon string about 1/16-in. in
diameter, such as 50-lb-test nylon fishing line) and a big enough
needle, string the "four" stop-strings across each 2 x 4-in. hole,(Use a
string long enough to make "four" uncut stop-strings.) Start on the
unfinished, back side of the plywood, on the opposite side from the
future valve flap. Tosecurethe startingend, wrap the stringaround a
half-driven tack, and then drive it in. Keep pullingthe stringtightas
you thread it through the' holes and as you wrap its finishing end
around a half-driven tack. Finally epoxy the string in all ofthe holes,
onthe back side ofthe plywood. (An equallystrongnylonstringcan be
made by twisting together 4 pieces of waxed nylon dental floss.)
(Stop-strings also can be positioned by using No.3 upholstery
tacks in place of the 1/16-in. diameter holes. Drive a tack partly in,
wind the stringaround it while pullingthe stringtight, and drive the
tack completely in, to hold the string securely. Finally, coat the tack
headsand the adjacent plywood with asmooth coveringofadhesive, to
provide a smooth seat for the valve flap.)
e. Cut out 6 plastic flaps of transparent 4-mil plastic film (each
3-3/4 x 11-1/2 in.). The easiest way to accurately cut a flap of thin
plastic film istomakea cardboard template3-3/4 x 11-1/2-in..place it
on the film, and cut around it with a very sharp knife.
f. In preparation for attaching a flap over each pair of 2 x 4-in.
valve holes, cover the plywood aboveeach pairofholes with masking
tape, up tothe straight"tack line" thatyou already have drawn 1/2in.
above each hole. Use your cardboard TEMPLATE. The masking
tape will prevent the adhesive (that will be used to attach each valve
'flap) from being applied too near the 2 x 4-in. holes, where adhesive
would keep a flap from opening fully.
g. Position each ofthe 6flaps properly in its closed position, with
its lower edge onthe line thatyou already have used the TEMPLATE
to draw 3/4 in. below each flap's pair of 2 x 4-in. holes. Position its
right side-edge on the line already drawn 1in. from the right side of
the right hole of each pair of 2 x 4-in. holes. Then put masking tape
over the lower edge ofeach flap and the adjacent plywood, to hold the
flap temporarily in its closed position.
h. Gently fold down the upper part of each flap, so that the
plywood above its pairof2x4-in. holesisuncovered(except whereyou
have placed the protective tape), and place small pieces of masking
tape so as to hold each flap temporarily in this folded-down position.
i. Quickly apply a thin coat of all-purpose construction adhesive
(such as Liquid Nails) to a 1/2-in.-wide plywood area above the
protective masking tape that covers the plywood up to the "tack line"
1/2 in. above each pair of 2 x 4-in. valve holes. Then promptly detach
the small pieces of masking tape holding the flap in its folded-down
position, and turn the flap (the lower partofwhich isstill being held in
its properclosed position by masking tape) into the whole flap's closed
position. Press the upper part firmly against the approximately 1/2-
in.-wide coating of adhesive, to secure the valve in its proper closed
position. Allow several hours for the adhesive to harden before
removing the tape and using the valve.
j. Drive small tacks (No.3; 3/8 in.) on the "tack line" (see
TEMPLATE), to make sure the flap stays securely attached after
long use. (Very small tacks are easily driven if held with tweezers or
needle-nosed pliers.)
o
Q
I
o
T ..I-----~.. ~PISTON ROO HOLE I
r--- 6-3/4 6- 3/4 ,--I
Fig. 9. Removable Partof Front End, Unfinished. Only the plywood
is shown.
CUTTING OUT THE PLYWOOD PARTS
1. The four parts of the "cylinder" (its bottom, two sides, and the
PARTITION; see Fig. 7)should be made with the wood grain of the
plywood running in the same direction as the lengths of these parts.
This reduces piston friction.
2. Outline on a sheetof exterior 3/4-in. plywood all of the plywood
parts-except for the 12 x 12-in. piston and the two 12 x 12-in.
construction forms, which are made of 3/8-in. exterior plywood. (If
:318-in. plywood is not available, use 1/4-in.) Do not assume that the
cornersofasheetofplywood are trulysquare. Alsocheck the widthof
the sawcut of the saw to be used, and allow for this width when
drawingadjacentoutlinesofpartsonthe plywood. Besureto makeall
corners square.
3. If you do not have a table saw that saws accurately, or a heavy-
duty saber saw, you will do well to pay a professional carpenter or
cabinet maker tosaw out the plywood parts-and also the piston rod if
you are making it out of an oak board. A professional can accurately
saw out all ofthe plywood partsand the 10valve holes inabout2 hours,
provided you have accurately outlined all saw lines.
4. Make the following plywood rectangles with tolerances of +or -
1/32 m.:
PARTITION, 12x 26-in:
Two sides, each 16-3/4 x 32-in. (If your "3/4-in. plywood" actually is
less than 11/16-in. thick, make the height of each of your sides
16-3/4-in. less the difference between 3/4-in. and the actual
thickness of your plywood. See Fig. 7.)
Bottom, 17-1/2 x 32-in.
Top, 13-1/2 x 32-in.
Two valve frames, each 4 x 12-in.
Piston, 12x 12-in.(of 3/8-in. plywood).
Two construction forms, each 12x 12-in.(of3/8-in. plywood).
5. Make the following plywood rectangles with tolerances of +or-
1/16 in.:
Back end, 13-1/2 x 17-1/4-in. (See Fig. 8.)
Removable (upper) part of front end, 13-1/2 x 10-7/8 in. (See Figs. 7
and 9.)
Fixed (lower) part of front end, 13-1/2x 6-3/8-in. (See Figs. 7and 10.)
The four partsof the air-intake duct: two each 6-1/2 x 6-in.; two each
6-112x 7-1/2-in. '
Two spacers (to be nailed to the bottom) each 3/4 x 3/4 x 32-in.
6. Saw out the 10 valve holes; a tolerance of +or - 1/8 in. is good
enough. (See Figs. 7,8,9, and 10.)
7. Saw a square 6 x 6-in. hole in the center of the top, as shown in
Fig. 2 - ifyou are going to install the homemade filter (described in
separate instructions) directly on top ofyour pump. (To connectyour
pumptoa round air-intake pipe, cutan appropriate round hole in the
top.)
8. Sandpaper the finished sides of the PARTITION, the two sides,
and the bottom, to reducefrictionon the reciprocatingpiston. Use fine
sandpaper.
9. Make and attach the 6 valve flaps, to complete the flap valves,
that are the lowest resistance, quickest acting type tested.
a. Make a 3-3/4 x 5-3/4-in. cardboard TEMPLATE, usingcarbon
paper to transfer lines of Fig. 11tocardboard. (See Fig. 11on page 7,PUTTING THE PUMP "BOX" TOGETHER
1. The following procedure is the best tested construction method
for persons who lack experience in putting parts together so that all
corners are exactly square. or who do not have the big clamps and
other glueing equipment used by cabinet makers. This procedure is
best carried out by two persons working together.
2. On the finished side of the top. draw two parallel lines exactly 12
in. apart and parallel to the top's 32-in.-longedges. Each of these lines
will be 3/4-in. from an edge. Alsodraw a line 6 in. from and parallel to
each end of the top. to mark the positions of the two valve frames. See
Fig. 2.
3. Build the pump's "box" upside down; start by placing its top on
the floor. as indicated by Fig. 12.
Fig. 12. Parts of the Pump "Box". with Dimensions in Inches. The Roman numbers give the best tested order for
attaching these parts to each other.
4. Attach the two valve frames II and III to the top I with
'construction adhesive. positioning each of them 6 in. from an end of
the top 1.Make sure that each frame's flap valve is upside down and
facing away from the center of the pump. Remove any adhesive
that is on the top beyond the ends of the valve frames. .
(When usingconstruction adhesiveto makethis pump, it isbestto
apply a rather thin coat to only one of the two plywood surfaces to be
joined. Then promptly rub one plywood part slightly back and forth
against the other. while pressing them together-thus making sure
that both surfaces are coated and in close' contact. Wait until the
adhesive sets and bonds adequately before attaching more parts.)
5. Draw two parallellineson the unfinished sideofthe PARTITION,
each ;] inches from one of its ends. Adhere the two 12-in.-long
unattached edgesof the valve frames to the PARTITION on these two
lines. as illustrated by Figs. 2, 7and 12.Allow time for the adhesive to
set.
6. Before permanentlyattachingside V. position it vertically with a
long edge restingon the top. and with a side-edgeof the PARTITION
and ends of the two valve frames I and II in contact with the finished
side ofside V. See Fig. 7.On the unfinished (outer) sideofside Vdraw
lines showing the positions of the PARTITION and of the two valve
frames in contact with the finished side of side V.
7. Preparatory to attaching side V to the PARTITION and to the
two valve frames. drill 4 slightly oversize screw holes (for your 2-in.
roundhead screws) through side V. Drill these holes so that a screw
will go into an end of each valve frame about 1 in. from its adhered
edge. and the other 2 screws will go into the side-edge of the
PARTITION. at points above the valve frames. Next. with side V
temporarily in its final position, drill with a smaller diameter drill
through the 4 holes in side V. into the PARTITION and into the two
valve frames. Then with the 4 screws temporarily connectside V, the
PARTITION. and the two valve frames, and, while checking with a
carpenter's square the squareness of the angle between the PARTI-
TION and side V, adjust the two pairs ofscrews to attain squareness.
Remove side V.
8. Apply adhesive to the 3/4-in.-wideareaalongthe longedgeof the
top, and if necessary a thicker coating of adhesive than normal to
unattached edges of the PARTITION and of the two valve frames.
Then promptly position side V, and by again screwing in and
adjustingthe 4screws, maketheangle between the PARTITIONand
side V square. Allow the adhesive to set.
9. Use short pieces of duct tape to temporarily attach the two 12x
12-in. construction forms to the PARTITION and to side V. (Before
using these forms, drive 4small nails into each form, near its corners,
to serve as handles for removingthem from thecompleted"cylinder"}
Attach a construction form near each end of the PARTITION.
10. Adhere the finished side of side VI to the top, to the unattached
side-edge of the PARTITION, and to end-edges of the valve frames,
while keeping side VI pressed against the two square construction
forms. To keep side VI pressed against the construction forms until
the adhesivesets, use small nails to temporarily nail two small boards
horizontally across the ends of the sides, at each end of the "box".
11. On the finished side of the bottom IX. draw two parallel lines
13-1/2-in. apart. making each line 6-3/4-in. from the center line of the
bottom, as shown in Fig. 7. Nail the two 3/4 x 3/4 x 32-in. spacer
boards VII and VIII to the bottom. 13-1/2-in. apart.
12. To attach the bottom, first place it (with its finished side down)
on the exposed long-edgesofthesides. Ifyou find thatthe bottom rests
on the construction forms and is not in contact with the long-edges of
the sides, in effect increase the heights of the sides by coating with
adhesive both the edges of the sides and the 3/4-in.-wide area of the
bottom to which the sides will be adhered. Then adhere the bottom
onto the edges of the sides. Before the adhesive hardens, remove any
that has been squeezed into the corner of the "cylinder"..-
(!)W
wa::IW
a..I
<IO...J.-
C\JIL.
II
WV(/)~
;;'0-,0 I
r0...Jr0
a..
<I...Ju,
--. a. _-
CUT OUT 2x4"IN. HOLE
STOP-STRING
- ~TOP-~TRING
-
- STOP- STRING -
~Tor-~TRING -
__e__ J_
~---5-3/4= HALF THE WIDTH OF FLAP
4 o
r------------------------'"7'..;;;..--'t"'·...............w::>...J
(!)
I~
3/4" •
W
Z
...J
u,
o
a..
<{
...Ju,
a::w.-zw
~
Fig. 11.TEMPLATE for Positioning the Stop-Strings of each of the 12valve holes, and for attaching each of the 6 valve flaps.
TRACE THIS DRAWING. TO MAKE THE WORKING
TEMPLATE, TRANSFER THE TRACING TO A PIECE OF
CARDBOARD. CUT OUT THE 2 X 4-INCH HOLE IN THE
CARDBOARD, AND MAKE SMALL HOLES SHOWING
THE POSITIONS OF THE STOP-STRINGS AND TACKS.Fig. 14. Plywood Piston with Sheetmetal Sealing Strips Attached.
PISTON ROD
SIDE OF PISTON
A SIDE
SHEETMETAL
STRIP
01-3/4 IN. LONG)
A TOP OR
BOTTOM
SHEETMETAL
STRIP
(11-13/16 IN. LONG)
h. Bend the other "T or B" strip, and similarly bend each of the
two "S" strips.
4. Attach the four sheetmetal sealing strips to the plywood piston
with No.6 tacks(l/2-in. long). Place on a solid metal surfacethe part
ofthe plywood piston oppositethe spot to which partofastripisbeing
tacked, sothat when a tack ishammered in its pointisclinched(bent
over) on the far side of the 3/8-ln.-thick plywood piston, by being
hammered against the solid metal surface.
a. First tack a "T or B" sheetmetal strip to the top of the piston,
and a "T or B"strip to its bottom.
b. Then tack the two "S" strips to its sides. The strips should fit
togethersoas to makesquarecorners.Ifadjacentends oftwostripsdo
not fit neatly together, cut bit by bit a very little off the end(s) of a
strip(s) so that the two adjacent ends fit together neatly at their
corner.
c. To prevent air leakage between the ends of the sealing strips,
put rubber cement in the four corner "cracks" between strips. (This
was not done on the test pump's piston.)
Fig. 13. Piston Sealing Strips, each made of a springy sheetmetal
strip 3 in. wide.
g. With the sheetmetal strip held sandwiched between the two
12-1/4-in.-long boards by the two "C" clamps and the vise, so that the
bending line for the almost 90-degree bend is barely visible, bend the
exposed part of the strip 90 degrees, in the same direction that the
3[8-in.-wide part was bent. See Figs. 13and 14.
1/4 IN. ~ '1/4 IN. PLYWOOD
PLYWOOD f! -.'#3 TACKS !t ~ #3 TACKS
~ ~ 1-1-1/2 IN ~ J: ,rH/2 IN
.!. 1 I APART - 1 If APART X
!~ ~l-f~~:!>\~T'bot~H/8--1~I'O j...7/8~
MAKING THE PISTON, THE PISTON ROD, AND ITS
HANDLE
1. Have a sheetmetal shop cut three 3-ft-long, 3-in.-wide strips of
galvanized steel sheetmetal that is no more than O.016-in.thick and
nolessthan 0.012-in.thick. (Mostgalvanized steel valley flashing used
by roofers and sold by many lumber yards is less than 0.016-in.thick;
30-gauge galvanized sheet metal sold by some sheetmetal shops is
about 0,015-in.thick.) Steel sheetmetal thicker than about0.016in. is
not springy enough and is unsatisfactory.
2. With a toleranceof+or-1/32-in.,cut from these strip's two strips
each 11-13/16-in.long,and two stripseach 11-3/4-in.long.(These four
strips first must be bent and then tacked to the four sides of the
plywood piston; these piston-sealing strips serve rather like piston
rings, by makingclose, sliding, low-friction contact with the sides of
the plywood "cylinder". Steel strips resist wear and if properly
lubricated make the pump serviceable for monthsofcontinuous use.)
3. Preparing the four sheetmetal sealing strips:
a. Since the strips to be tacked to the top and the bottom of the
piston must be bentdifferently from the strips to be tacked to its two
sides, mark"Tor B"oneach of.he two stripsthatare 11-13/16 in.long,
and mark "S" on each of the two strips that are 11-3/4 in. long.
b. On each of the two strips marked "T or B", draw an ink line
along which to make the approximately 30degree bend, and another
line for the approximately90degree bend. (See the left halfof Fig. 13
for the distances from the edges of these two "T or B"strips to their
bends.) Alsodraw two ink lines along which to drive tacks, spaced as
shown in the left half of Fig. 13.
Likewise draw four lines on each ofthe two strips marked "S",
as specified in the right half of Fig. 13,noting thatsome ofthese lines
are spaced differently than corresponding lines on the strips marked
"Tor B".
c. Usingasmallsharpened nail for a punch and placingonestrip
of sheetmetal at a time on a s..iooth board, punch 2 rows oftack holes
in each strip. The tack holes should he about 1-1/2 in. apart.
d. From a nominal 1 x 2-in. straight board, make two boards
each about 3/4 x 7/8 x 12-1/4in., for use in bendingthe sealing strips.
e. Securely sandwich a "T or B" strip of sheetmetal between the
two 12-1/4-in.-long boards placed exactly on top of each other, by
tightening two "C" clamps on the ends of the two boards, so that the
bending line 3/8-in. from one side ofthe strip isjust visible along the
straightedgeofa board.Then hold the two clampedboardsin a viseso
that the 3/8-in.-wide part of the sheetmetal strip is uppermost and
vertical.
f. Bend the exposed part of the strip about 30 degrees off the
vertical, away from the side of the strip where the holes have been
indented bythe punch. Tobend evenly, hammergentlyand repeatedly
ona 3/4 x3/4 x 18-in.board held againstthe exposed 3/8-in,-widepart
of the strip.
13. Permanentlyattach the fixed partofthe frontend X(see Fig. 7,
10and 12)with adhesiveand small nails tothe sides and tothe bottom.
Besure that its flap valve is upside down and is facing away from
the centerofthe pump, and that a long edge ofthis part is level with
the outer side of the bottom. Remove the construction forms.
14. Paint the interiorofthe "cylinder" with sealer-after removing
all adhesive that may be in its corners.
15.After the sealer dries, sandpaper the interior of the "cylinder"
with fine sandpaper, and paint it again with the final coat of sealer.
16.Toattach the removable partofthe frontend XI,stand the "box"
on its completely open end and drill slightly oversize screw holes (for
your 2-in. screws) clear through the removable part ofthe front end,
as indicated by Fig. 9. With the flap valve facing outward,
temporarilyattach this part with afewsmall nails tothe end ofthetop
and to ends of the two sides. Then with a smaller-diameter bit, drill
the screw holes deep enough into the top and the sides so that the 7
screws will hold securely.
17. Sothat it will be unnecessary to tightly screwon the removable
part of the front end in order to make its repeated temporary
attachments airtight, tack felt weatherstripping (best 1/8-in. thick
and 5/8-in. wide), or strips made of two thicknesses of flannel, to the
contact edges of the top and the sides. No.3 (3/8-in.) carpet tacks
serve well. Then with a razor blade carefully cut the felt coveringthe
screw holes in the edges, and remove these small pieces of coveringMt .
18.Attach with screws the removable part of the front end.
19.To prevent damage to the front-end valve flaps when you stand
the pumpon its frontend, epoxy asmall piece of3/8-in. plywood to the
front end, near each of its four corners, as pictured in Figs. 3 and 5.
Before standingthe pumponits front end, usesmall pieces ofmasking
tape to temporarily secure its valve flaps in their closed positions.
20. Attach the back end XII, using only screws. See Fig. 8. (For
repairs. the back end may have to be removed.) To make the
attachmentofthe back end airtight, coat its attachment"crack"only
with rubber cement5. For the piston rod, saw from a straight, well-seasoned oak
board a 3/4 x 1-3/4 x 36-1/2-in. board. Sandpaper it smooth. (A piston
rod made of well-seasoned oak is less likely to break if abused, but
necessitatesusingscrews, inplace ofnails and staples, for attachments.
Piston rods made of nominal 1x 2-in. fir boards were undamaged in
the tests.)
6. To complete the piston rod:
a. For the handle, use 4 pieces of a nominal 1x 2-in. board cut to
the lengths shown in Fig. 15. Also see Fig. 16. Round all edges and
corners, to minimize the chances of the operators' blistering their
hands.
b. Paint the piston rod and its handle with sealer. When dry,
sandpaper. Then apply a final coat of sealer.
c. Use adhesive, screws, and nails (or adhesive and nails if your
piston rod isofsoft wood) in making the handle iIlustrated by Fig. 15.
~""';:':';--:.....;.:.:.fT
to
~::t±;~l.I. 13~
Fig. 15. Piston Rod Handle Made of 3/4 x 1-3/4-in. Boards.
Fig. 16. The Pump Handle of the Durability-Test Pump, showing
how one man best holds it when two men are pumping.
d. Toreduce friction on the piston rod and resultantenlargement
of the piston-rod hole with long use, coat with epoxy all four sides of
the piston-rod hole. See Figs. 7 and 16. Be sure that the piston rod
slidessnuglyyetfreely in its hole when the removable partofthefront
end is screwed in place.
e. From a piece of thick truck-tire inner-tube rubber, cuta 2-in.-
wide strip 12-in. long. To make the 2-in.-wide rubber bumper (see
Figs. 15and 16),connectone end of this rubber strip to the center ofa
3/4-in.-wide side of the piston rod. Do not place any screwor staple in
the strip closer than 1 in. from the strip's forward edge, that may
repeatedly bump into the front end. Wrap and attach the strip quite
tightly around the piston rod next to the handle. (If you have only a
piece of passenger-car inner-tube rubber, then to make a 2-in.-wide
bumper use a 4-in.-wide strip of this thinner rubber folded double
lengthwise.)
7. Attaching the piston rod to the piston:
a. On the back of the 12 x 12-in. plywood piston, mark lines to
enableyou toattach the piston rod as pictured in Fig. 14.Note thatthe
lowersideofthe piston rod isexactly 5-1/2 in. above the lower edge of
the plywood of the piston, and that the center line of the piston rod
intersects the vertical center line of the plywood of the piston.
b. To the end of the piston rod (see Fig. 14)adhere and screw (or
adhere and nail ifyour piston rod is not oak) two piecesof nominal 1x
2-in. boardseach 3in. long. Eachofthesetwo small boardsand the end
of the piston rod are in contact with and securely connected to the
plywood piston, and form a perfect "T" at the end of the piston rod.
c. Connect the piston rod to the piston, best with epoxy (or
adhesive)and small screws. Make sure that:(1) the four piston sealing
stripsoverlap the piston's plywood in the directionofthe piston rod, (2)
the 1-3/4-in.-wide sides of the piston rod are parallel to the top and
bottom of the piston, and (3) the piston rod is perpendicular to the
piston. See Figs. 2 and 14.
d. Make and attach to the piston rod a 3-in.-long rubber bumper,
positioned close to the piston as shown in Fig. 2.
OPERATING THE PUMP
1. Check tosee thatthe four sheetmetal stripson the four sidesofthe
piston all makeeven contactwith the wallsofthe"cylinder"when the
piston is moved back and forth. If the piston does not slide back and
forth quite easily even when not lubricated, carefully bend a strip or
strips so that they press less against the "cylinder" walls. If while
someone is shining a flashlight through a valve opening in the other
end of the pump you observe that parts of a sheetmetal strip do not
make close contact with a "cylinder" wall, gently bend outward that
part of the strip.
2. Lubricate all four walls of the "cylinder", the sheetmetal strips
that slide against the walls, and the piston rod. Use a very thin
motor-breakin white lithium grease(not an ordinary bearing grease,
that is too sticky). Or use a thin oil. The pump should be lubricated
after no more than each 24 hours of use, and before being used again
after days of disuse. .
3. Install the pump at a height above the floor so that most of the
persons who are going to pump can push and pull with their hands
moving at about the same height that their elbows are when they are
standing. See Fig. 3for an exampleofa pump-supportingtable raised
to an efficient heightfor operators who are the height of the pumper
pictured. .
4. Tosave work and to minimize wearon the pump, usually operate
it with a length ofstroke a little shorter than the distance between its
two rubber bumpers. To save energy especially when pumping air
through a high resistance ventilation system, move the piston back
and forth by using mostly your leg and body muscles.
PROLONGED STORAGE
Wipe offall greaseand other lubricants ifyoudo not plan to use this
pump for months. All lubricants-especially those on wood-tend to
become gummy with time.
Keep your supply of pump lubricants taped to your pump.
REQUEST
Suggestions for improving this pump and/or these instructions will
be appreciated, and may contribute to improvements likely to save
lives.
Cresson H. Kearny
Copyright © 1986 by Cresson H. Kearny
No part of this work (except brief passages that a reviewer may
quote in a review) may be reproduced in any form unless the
reproduction includes the following statement:"Copyright © 1986by
Cresson H. Kearny. All or part of this information on the Plywood
Double-Action Piston Pump may be reproduced without obtaining
permission from anyone."FILTER BOX AND FILTER
PURPOSES
The primary shelter ventilation requirement is to supply enough
outdoor air to maintain endurable heat-humidity conditions.
Tokeep the concentration ofrespiratorycarbon dioxide lowenough
for survival, very little fresh outdoor air is required. Even for an
infant or an infirm person remaining in a crowded shelter for days, 3
cubic feet per minute(3cfm) isadequate. Fora healthy adultor child
1.5cfm is enough. Too much carbon dioxide, not too little oxygen, is
the initial causeofunendurableconditions in inadequatelyventilated
shelters in which the air does not get unendurably hot.
In contrast, up to 25cfrn ofoutdoorair per occupant may be needed
to maintain endurable heat-humidity conditions inside a crowded
shelter occupied for days during a heat wave in a hot, humid part of
the U.S. Hence the need for a large-volume ventilating pump, best
with a low-resistance filter.
Ifoutdoorairflows into ashelterthrough-a hood,gooseneck pipe, or
other air-supply opening that causes all but tiny fallout particles to
fall out before the air reaches shelter occupants, breathing this
unfiltered air will not result in short-term radiation casualties.
However, a very small fraction ofthe occupants ofa shelter supplied
with unfiltered air in an area of heavy fallout may contract cancer
years later as a resultof breathing shelter air containing tiny fallout
particles, that a properly designed filter could have removed.
Air that has been in contact with fallout particles before being
filtered is not radioactive.
The homemade filter illustrated below, if used with an efficient
"suction" pump such as the Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump
described separately, will remove practically all fallout particles
likely to cause casualties even decades later. This filter also will
remove most infective aerosols, the air-borne tiny particles used in
biological warfare - an unlikely type ofattack on the United States.
It will not remove poisonous gasses, an even less likely danger to
Americans if all-out war befalls us.
CONSTRUCTION
Filter Box
If20 x 20-inch furnace filters are available, use plywood or boards
to build the filter box shown in the illustration. To make permanent
connections airtight, first use waterproof construction adhesive or
glue, and then tape. (If only smaller filters are available, reduce the
horizontal dimensions of the box accordingly, except for the top and
bottom openings.) Check to be sure that your filters will fit snugly in
the box of the size you plan to build.
The square frame on the bottom of the filter box should fit snugly
over the square air-intake duct on the top of your Plywood Double-
Action Piston Pump. Tape the cracksto makethe connection airtight
and to permit easy removal of the filter box.
Make the illustrated 4 supports of the hardware cloth no thicker
than 3/4 inch, thus providing enough space'below the filter for low-
resistance airflow. (Hardware cloth is a stiff, square-mesh, molten-
dipped galvani-zed wire.)
Make the square top of the filter box so that it covers the upper
edges of the box's sides and can be easily removed. Then cut in its
centera round holeslightlysmallerthan 4inches indiameter. File the
hole'sedgessothata4-inch-diametercan (such as acoffeecan with its
top and bottom cut out) fits snugly in this hole. To connect the can
securely and airtight, first use waterproof construction adhesive or
epoxy, and then tape. (If construction adhesive or epoxy is not
available, cut a 2-1/2-inch-diameterhole inthe centerofthebottom of
the 4-inch-diametercan. Then makeradial cuts spaced aboutone-half
inch apart,out tothe full diameterofthecan. Bend these tabsoutward
180 degrees, preparatory to tacking them with small tacks to the
bottom of the filter box top. Tape airtight.)
Sothat the top ofthe filter boxcan beeasily removed, tape itonto its
box. Aroll ofducttapeshould bekept with the filter boxand pumpat
all times.
To connect the filter box to the shelter's air-intake pipe, the best
widely available air duct isthe inexpensive, 4-inch-diameter flexible
duct used with clothes dryers.
SEALED WITH
DUCT TAPE)
-- -- - - --------::...---
DUCT TAPE
SEALED WITH
DUCT TAPE'
20.20 IN
REMOVABLE TOP
SUPPORT
3/4.3/4.20 IN.
TWO 20' 20<2 IN. "1:~=r--------'''FURNACE FILTERS
TOWEL
GALVANIZED-WIRE
HARDWARE CLOTH
Homemade Filter To Fit On Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump, and To Be Connected to a 4-Inch-Diameter Air-Intake Pipe.Filter Materials
Furnace or air-conditioner dust filters, those made of oiled fiber-
glass fibers. will remove practically all but the very smallest fallout
particles. Filters that are sold in box-like housings can easily be
installed sothatall the pumped air will passthrough them. by taping
them to the inner sides of the filter box. The illustration shows two
plain matsof furnace filter material. each taped around its edges. (If
commercial dust filters are not available, bath towel cloth will serve.
However, in very dusty areas a cloth filter may become overloaded,
thus seriously reducing the rate of airflow much sooner than if an
oiled fiber filter is used as a prefilter.)
To filter out most of the tiny particles that may pass through one or
more furnace filters, place two thicknesses of bath towel on top of the
filter-support made of hardware cloth, and tape them around their
edges to the box. See illustration.
Tests by U.S. Army specialists have shown that filtering air
through two thicknesses of bath towel removes about 85 percent of
even microscopic aerosols as small as 1to 5 microns in diameter. (See
"Emergency Respiratory Protection Against Radiological and Bio-
logical Aerosols", by H. G. Guyton et al., A.M.A. Archives of
Industrial Health, Vol. 20,July through Dec. 1959.)This is the size of
most infective aerosols used in biological warfare. In most of an area
subjected to a biological attack, if 85 percent of this size-range of
infective aerosols and practically all larger particles are removed,
then most persons breathing this filtered air will not receive enough
infective agents to infect and sicken them.
Persons who are especially desirous of protecting their shelter's
occupantsagainst biological warfare aerosols, butwho can not afford
or obtain expensive High Efficiency Particulate Air filters (HEPA
filters), should consider using disposable pleated air filters that meet
official ASHRAE standards. One 2-in. pleated air filter, measuring
19-1/2 x 19-1/2 in., will remove over 90 percent of particles in the
1.0-5.0micron range, yetwhen clean its resistance toan airflowof200
cfm isonly about 0.2 in. watergauge(about0.007 psi). Its cost isabout
twice thatofagood ordinary furnace filterofthesamesize. However,
it has approximatelythree times the lifeofa standard panel type filter
before becoming overloaded. Disposable pleated air filters are avail-
able in larger cities.
USE
The illustrated homemade filter has such low resistance to airflow
that, when up to about 200 cfm is being pumped through it by a
Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump, the air volume is decreased by
only about 10 percent, as compared to the volume pumped with no
filter in the ventilation system. With a homemade Plywood Double-
Action Piston Pump, up to approximately 200 cfm can be pumped
through this filter even when the total difference in air pressure
(caused by the ventilation pipes, a dirty filter, etc. that restrict
airflow) is high, about 5 inches water gauge (0.18 psi).
Even if the United States suffers an all-out Soviet attack, only a
small partof its area will besubjected to blasteffectssevereenough to
injure the occupants of fallout shelters. (Fallout shelters are not
designed to withstand blast, butespeciallytypicalearth-coveredones
afford consequential blast protection.) In contrast, an installed filter,
unless protected by an efficient blastvalve, will be wrecked by aquite
low-pressure blast wave that comes down its open air-intake pipe
-even if the small partof the blast wave that would enter the shelter
room through its open ventilation pipes is not nearly powerful enough
toinjuretheshelteroccupants. Thus unprotected installed filters will
be wrecked in an area several times as large as the area in which
occupants of fallout shelters will be injured by blast.
To be sure of having a filter in good condition, you can:
1. Make and keep in your shelter an extra complete filter, ready to
replace your installed filter if it is damaged, or if it becomes
overloaded with dust and its resistance to airflow becomes too high.
Furthermore, if your filter is installed in your shelter room and
becomes so radioactive with retained fallout particles that it is
delivering a consequential radiation dose to shelter occupants, it is
advantageous to be able to remove it, pitch it out, 'and install a
replacement filter. (To be able to supply your shelter with unfiltered
air in peacetime or after the end of consequential fallout danger, you
should make and keep ready a duct with appropriate fittings to
connect your pump directly to its air-intake pipe.)
2. Ifyou have only one filter, do not install it beforeyou need tofilter
the air supply. Connect your pump directly to the air-intake pipe,
using an appropriate duct and fittings. Then before the attack and
before the arrival of fallout (revealed by your fallout-monitoring
instrument), keep your shelter well ventilated with unfiltered air.
Whetheror not yourfilter is installed, stop ventilatingyourshelterfor
a few hours while heavy fallout is being deposited outside - unless
heat-humidityconditionsbecome unbearable. Ifbeforeshelterventila-
tion is stopped the shelter air does not contain an abnormally high
concentration of carbon dioxide, then nooutdoor air need be supplied
for about 5 hours to prevent building up too high a concentration of
respiratory carbon dioxide - provided there is about 70cubic feet of
shelter-room volume for each occupant.
AN ENCOURAGING REMINDER
Persons making preparations to improve their chances ofsurviving
an all-out attack should realize that if the United States is hit with
warheads the sizes ofthose in the 1987 Sovietintercontinental arsenal,
the fallout particles of critical concern will be much larger than the
extremely small particles (l to 5 microns in diameter) which are not
completely removed'bythisfilter. Falloutparticlesthissmall produced
by large nuclear explosions do not fall to the ground for many days to
months after the nuclear explosions, by which time they have become
much less radioactive. Essentially all of the larger particles can be
removed merely by filtering the air through a few thicknesses of bath
towel cloth.Appendix F
Means for Providing Improved Natural Ventilation and
Daylight to a Shelter with an Emergency Exit
THE NEED
Survivors in areas of heavy fallout can
greatly reduce the radiationdoses thatthey will
receive, and thus decrease their risks of con-
tractingcancer, ifthey sleep and spend manyof
their non-outdoor-working hours inside good
sheltersduringthefirst severalmonths afteran
attack. (See Minimizing Excess Radiogenic Cancer
Deaths After a Nuclear Attack, by Kathy S. Gant
and Conrad V. Chester, Health Physics, Sep-
tember 1981.)
A permanentfamily sheltercan serve quite
well for months as a post-attack temporary
home if it is designed to provide adequate
natural ventilation most of the time, to have
adequate and easy forced ventilation by a KAP
when forced ventilation is needed, and to have
daylight illumination. A shelter dependent on
ventilation laboriously pumped through pipes
and on artificial lights even during daytime is
much less practical for use as a post-attack
home.
The following instructions should enable a
family having an earth-covered shelter with an
emergency exit to make it much more livable
for months-long occupancy. The means de-
scribed below for providing improved ventila-
tion and daylight illumination also will supply
guidance to survivors who will build shelters
post-attack to minimize continuing radiation
exposures, especially to children and pregnant
women.
BUILDING AND USING A MULTI-PURPOSE
EMERGENCY EXIT HOUSING
Build a multi-use emergency exit housing
of the design pictured in Fig. F.l and detailed in
Fig. F.2. Size your exit housing to fit snugly
over the top of your completed vertical exit
shaft. This exit housing is made of 3/4-inch
exterior plywood, four 2 x 2 x 36-inch boards,
and four 16 x 16-inch window panes of 1/8-inch
Plexiglas. Plated screws and waterproof ad-
hesives are used to assure sturdiness and
durability.
Fig.F.1. Multi-UseEmergencyExitHousing
Installed Over the Square Emergency Exit
Described by Figs. 17.1, 17.2, and 17.3.
The adjustable top of this exit housing
measures 4x 4 x 1feet, andcan be tiltedto make
different sized ventilation openings in any of
four directions. The top also can be raised
straight up to make various sized openings all
the wayaround, oritQan becompletelyclosed -
as explained by Fig. F.2 and the following
descriptions of its uses.11
i
48"
Fig. F.3. The Top and Four Walls of the
Multi-PurposeEmergencyExitHousing, Nested
Together to Save Storage Space.
Fig. FA. Viewfrom BelowtheExit, Looking
UptheMulti-PurposeEmergencyExitHousing.
The top is shown supported in a tilted position
by two 6-inch-wide boards placed between a
wall and the top.
The illustrated housing over a vertical exit
provides:
* A means to regulate shelter ventilation,
and to increase natural ventilation when the
wind is blowing. If, for example, the shelter's
opened exit is to the north of its opened entry
and a northwindisblowing, shelterairflowwill
blow in through the exit and out through the
entry. This natural ventilating airflow, often
inadequate, is increased ifthe adjustable top of
the exithousingisnot simplyraised6 inches on
all four sides, but is tilted as shown in Fig. F.l,
with its south side closed and its north side
tilted up 6 inches to provide a 6 x 26-inch
ventilation opening between the upper edge of
the entry housing's north wall and its top. Then
a north wind striking the north wall produces
'",- ~
48"
3/4:J~i 36" ~U/4"In 34 1/2" ~I I~
MOUNDED OVER
SHELTER
N
Ii- r'-·- Ir--- - - - - ---.I • --. ---.r..L~
.... I J " II I /,-" I'... l5
• 1 \" rn~I'--- - - - - ~ Irn\" I .-r=
~ 1 \/ jII" II [I.'III \'I I •.... ] \ 1\1 \11 I I I I ..1\' Ihil I:----:--:j II~II(\.I+
~
''I-:l '; I ' ONEOF. I II t
I )~ 4 WINDOWS J II
\ I 12xl21N, I .~
~: II f \ . \} II !.~
~;;,~ I" , + II - '...~. i 1
1
\" • • • • ('~ 11 '"
T Ii ~ -t - - - - - J r:-IT-
TOP OF EARTH 1. II f11
1
( I, I tIi
I ~ ~ ~
II ;;-=1 I ~ II
I t~ I ~-; I
~ '1.1 L1.A
.-,,', CONCRETE SHAFT I~
1/" ~
14"\. 26 IN, INSIDE _14.."f--
.. 34 IN, OUTSIDE _I
Fig. F.2. Plan and Side View of Multi-
Purpose Emergency Exit Housing, on a Square
Emergency Exit with 34 x 34-Inch .Croes-
Sectional Outside Dimensions.
In Figs. F.2 and F.3, note the eight bevelled
plywood guides, twoonthe insideofeachsideof
the top. These guides are needed so that the top
can be tilted in the position desired, merely by
using a stick to raise it from below. To hold the
top in a tilted or raised position, spacer boards
are placed between the raised top and the upper
edges of a wall or walls, as illustrated by Fig.
FA.increasedairpressureoverand abovethiswall,
forcing more airintotheexitandonthroughthe
shelter. In contrast, if a south wind is blowing,
natural airflow will go in through the shelter's
entry and out through its exit. And if the ad-
justable top still is tilted open to the north as
illustrated, then reduced air pressure over and
above the downwind north wall will "suck" an
increasedairflowoutoftheexitandthroughthe
shelter.
Themeasuredincreases inairflowsthrough
a small shelterresultingfrom thetopofthisexit
housing being tilted were only 40-50 cfm when
an 8-10 mph breeze was blowing. These rather
smallincreasesinairflow, however, oftenwould
makeit unnecessaryto supplyforced ventilation
to a family shelterbyintermittentlyoperatinga
KAP. .
* Exclusion of rain, snow, and larger dust
and fallout particles. The four 12 x 48-inch
verticalsides of the adjustabletopoverhangthe
exit housing's walls by 6 to 12 inches. Thus the
top serves as a large ventilation hood over the
exit, preventingrain, snow, and larger dust and
fallout particlesfromenteringwhileventilation
is continuing. (To prevent entry of flies and
mosquitoes, an insect SCreen panel, made to fit
overthebottomoftheemergencyexit,shouldbe
kept stored in the shelter until needed. A SCreen
door for the inner entry doorway also should be
stored.Rememberthatinstallingscreensgreatly
reduces natural ventilation airflows.)
* A reliable source ofdaylight. The four 12 x
12-inchwindows ofthis exithousingletenough
daylight into the exit shaft, that is painted
white, to permit a person on the shelter floor
below to read, even for several minutes after
sunset. See:Fig. FA.
* A way to observe what is going on all
aroundtheshelter,withouthavingtogooutside,
and with lessenedexposuretofallout radiation.
*Quickinstallationpost-attack, afterfallout
decays sufficiently. In an installation test, dirt
was dug away to expose the upper 12 inches of
the emergencyexitshaft. Theninjust8 minutes
the author and a boy carried the 5 parts of this
exit housing 80 feet, positioned its four walls
around the already exposed upper 12 inches of
the reinforced concrete emergency exit, nailed
its walls together, and placed its adjustable top
in the tilted position pictured in Fig. F.1.
BUILDING AND USING AN ENTRYWAY
COVER THAT PROVIDES A LARGE,
PROTECTED VENTILATION OPENING
Build a shelter entryway cover that keeps
out rain, snow, and the bigger dust and fallout
particles while providing a large, protected
ventilationopeningboth for natural ventilation
and for easy forced ventilation by a KAP when
needed. Foran exampleofOne type ofentryway
cover, see Fig. F.5. This photo shows a 4-piece
cover, that two men in a little less than 5
minutes carried out ofthis shelter and installed
over the 4 x 6-foot opening above the shelter's
opened stairway doors.
Fig. F.5. A Quickly Installable, 4-Piece
Entryway Cover That Provides Easy Access
and a Large, Protected Ventilation Opening.
This cover is made of 4 pieces of 1/4-inch
chipboard, each5feet wide, and shortlengths of
nailed-on 1 x2-inch boards. These 4 pieces can
be tied quickly with their attached nylon cords
to innerparts of thetwo2x 6-foot steelentryway
doors, which are pictured in their opened, up-
right positions.
Thelowermostofthe4chipboard pieceshas
a groove near each end. The grooves are each
made of 2 nailed-on lengths of 1 x 2 lumber
spaced apart to fit the lower ends of the doors
and hold them in their upright positions 4 feet
apart. Theupperedge ofthislowermostpieceis
8 inches below the lower raised corners of the
doors, sothatan 8x 48-inchventilation opening
is assured when the lower of the two large
coveringpieces(picturedbeingheldopen) rests
on the doors. (This step-over piece of chipboard
illustratesa waytoreduce the quantityoflarger
fallout particles that will be blown into many
types of shelters, because most sandlike parti-
cles andcoarsedust areblown alongclosetothe
ground. They are not blown upward and over a
vertical obstruction by most winds. Ifan entry-
way has an inner, ordinarydoorway, evenmore
fallout particles can be kept out of the shelter
room if an 18 x 18-inch ventilationhole. i.s.e.ut..-L",-OTHER ENTRYWAY COVERS TO PROVIDE
LARGE PROTECTED OPENINGS FOR
NATURALANDKAPVENTILATION
The owner of a permanent shelter with an
emergencyexitmaybeabletoimprovisecover-
ings over its entry and exit after fallout decays
sufficientlytopermitworkoutdoors- provided
that he understands natural ventilation and
low-pressure forced ventilation requirements,
andhastheboards,nails,piecesofchipboardor
plywoodorcanvas,tools,etc. needed. Butifyou
owna permanentshelteryourpre-crisisprepara- .
tions surelyshouldinclude makingandstoring
ready-to-install entryway and exit coverings of
whatever designs you decide will best meet
your anticipated needs for high-protection-
factorsleepingandlivingquartersduringweeks
or months following a nuclear attack.
The most practical hinge that the author
has devised is illustrated by the drawing. This
flexible hinge is much less likely to be broken
than are conventional hinges, and makes it
easier to build the two large covering pieces to
fit over the opened doors. Note that the upper
edge of the lower large piece goes under the
rainproofing, 6-inch-wide rubber flap, which is
nailed only along the lower edge of the upper
large covering piece. Then the two large pieces
are held and hinged together byfirst stretching
each of 2 strong, 2-inch-wide rubber bands (or
rustproof springs) attached by cords to the
upper large covering piece, and then hooking
its attached bent-wire hook onto a nylon cord
loop connected to the lower large covering
piece. Eachstrongrubberband(cutfrom a truck
innertube) and its attached hook and nylon
cords is 5 inches from an opened door. Thus
hinged, the lower large piece can be easily
raised to permit a person to step out of or into
the stairway entry. When this hinged lower
large piece is closed and tied down, a 2.7 square
foot protected ventilation opening with a 10-
inch overhang results.
N
"
0....
z~lQ
000
zOgwo
0a:...J
~UJUJ
,.o.UJ...JO' ....
0.:::>(1)
~
o........oal
To keepthetwo large pieces
from moving sideways, one 1 x
2-inch board is nailed near each
of their side edges, spaced so as
to lie against the outside of each
opened, upright steel door. To
strengthenthehingelineedge of
the upper large covering piece,
a i x 2-inchboard is nailed along
its lower edge.
The lower of the two large covering pieces
also has a reinforcing 1 x 2 nailed near its
hinged edge.
the door near its top. Then air entering the
shelter room will have to rise at least 4 feet
abovethe entrywayfloor, andmostof thelarger
fallout particles will be deposited on the entry-
way floor.)
Thechipboardpieceattached
to the upper ends of the doors
also has two 1x 2 boards nailed
near each end, forming grooves
into whichthe upper ends ofthe
doorsfit. Thedoorsarethusheld
in their upright positions and
rain, etc. is kept from falling or
being blown through the upper
end into the entryway.
The uppermost of the two
lar~e covering pieces of chip-
board(orexteriorplywood)rests
on the opened doors and is kept
from slipping down by a 1 x 2-
inch board nailed 4 inches from
its upper end. This small board
"hooks" over the upper edge of
the piece of chipboard (or ply-
wood) attachedtotheupperends
of the steeldoors. (See thedraw-
ing on the side of this column.)
This large piece of chipboard is
securely tied to the doors.Selected References
1. Radiobiological Factors in Manned Space
Flight, Space Radiation Study Panel of the Life
Sciences Committee, Space Science Board, National
Academy of Sciences, National Research Council,
1967.
2. Personal communication with Dr. C. C.
Lushbaugh, Chairman, Medical and Health Science
Division, Oak Ridge Associated Universities, inJune
1977.
3. The Effects of Nuclear Weapons, 1962,
Samuel Glasstone, Editor, published by U.S. Atomic
Energy Commission, April 1962.
4. "Adequate Shelters and Quick Reactions to
Warning: A Keyto Civil Defense,"Francis X. Lynch,
Science, Vol. 142, pp. 665-667, 1963.
5. Blast Tests ofExpedient Shelters inthe DICE
THROW Event, Cresson H. Kearny and Conrad V.
Chester, Oak Ridge National Laboratory Report No.
5347, February 1978.
6. The Effects ofNuclear Weapons, 1977,Third
Edition, Samuel Glasstone and Philip J. Dolan,
Editors, U.S. Department of Defense and U.S.
Department of Energy, 1977.This most authoritative
publication has numerous sections written for non-
technical educated readers. In 1986, a cloth-bound
copy can be purchased for $17.00 from the Superin-
tendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. When ordering,ask
for The Effects ofNuclear Weapons, 1977, Stock No.
008-046-00093-0. (Since the price may be increased in
future years, a buyer should first write requestingthe
current price.)
7. The 900 Days, Harrison E. Salisbury, Harper
Row, New York, N.Y., 1969.
8. Expedient Shelter Construction and Occu-
pancy Experiments, Cresson H. Kearny, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory Report No. 5039, March 1976.
9. Biological TolerancetoAir Blast and Related
Biomedical Criteria, Clayton S. White et aI.,
Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and
Research, Albuquerque, N.M., April 1965.
10. Instrument Requirementsfor Radiological
Defense of the U.S. Population in Community
Shelters, Carsten M. Haaland and Kathy S. Gant,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory Report No. 5371,
August 1978.
II. Field Testing and Evaluation ofExpedient
Shelters in Deeply Frozen Ground, Ren Read,
College of Environmental Design, University of
Colorado, Denver, Colo., July 1978.
12. "Construction of Hasty Winter Shelters,"
Cresson H. Kearny, Annual Progress Report, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory Report No. 4784, March
71-March 72, December 1972.
13. Shelter Occupancy Studies atthe University
ofGeorgia, Final Report, J. A. Hammes and Thomas
R. Ahearn, OCD Contract No. OCD-PS-66-25,
1966.
14. "Environmental Physiology of Shelter
Habitation," A. R. Dasler and D. Minard, paper
presented at the ASHRAE Semiannual Meeting in
Chicago, January 1965.
15. Studies ofthe Bureau of Yards and Docks
Protective Shelter. NRL Report 5882, U.S. Naval
Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., December
1962.
16. Winter Ventilation Tests, Guy B. Panero,
Inc., Subcontract No. B-64212-US for Office of Civil
Defense, February 1965.
17. "Interim Standards for Ventilating Systems
and Related Equipment for Fallout Shelters,"Office
of Civil Defense, Washington, D.C., 1962.18. Response to DCPA Questions on Fallout,
DCPA Research Report No. 20, prepared by
Subcommittee on Fallout, Advisory Committee on
Civil Defense, National Academy of Sciences,
November 1973.
19. Personnel Shelters and Protective Con-
struction, NAVDOCKS P-81, Department of Navy,
Bureau of Yards and Docks, September 1961.
20. The Destruction ofDresden, David Irving,
Wm. Kimber and Co., London, May 1963.
21. Chinese Civil Defense, excerpts from Basic
Military Knowledge, Shanghai 1975, ORNLj tr-
4171, edited by Conrad V. Chester and Cresson H.
Kearny, Oak Ridge National Laboratory translation,
August 1977.
22. The Effects of Mass Fires on Personnel in
Shelters, A. Broidoand A. W. McMasters, Technical
Paper 50, Pacific Southwest Forest and Range
Experiment Station, Berkeley, Calif., August 1960.
23. Civil Defense, N. I. Alabin, et aI., Moscow
1970, ORNLjtr-2793, Oak Ridge National Labora-
tory translation, December 1973.
24. Manual of Individual Water Supply Sys-
tems, Environmental Protection Agency, Water
Supply Division, Washington, D.C, 1973.
25. "Solubility of Radioactive Bomb Debris,"
D. C Linsten, et aI., Journal of American Water
Work Association, 53, pp. 256-62, 1961.
26. Maintaining Nutritional Adequacy During
A:Prolonged Food Crisis, Kay B.Franzand Cresson
H. Kearny, Oak Ridge National Laboratory Report
No. ORNL-5352, July 1979.
27. Livestock, Fallout and a Planfor Survival,
W. F. Byrne and M.C Bell, UT-AEC Agricultural
Research Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tenn., R-CD-3,
April 1973.
28. "Availability and Shipment of Grain for
Survival of the Relocated Population of the U.S.
After a Nuclear Attack," Carsten M. Haaland,
American Journal ofAgricultural Economics, May
1977.
29. Personal Communication with Kathy S.
Gant and Conrad V. Chester, January 1979.
30. Food Stockpiling for Emergency Shelters,
Food and Materials Division, CommodityStabiliza-
tion Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, April
1961.
31. The KFM, a Homemade Yet Accurate and
Dependable Fallout Meter, Cresson H. Kearny, Paul
R. Barnes, Conrad V. Chester, and Margaret W.
Cortner, Oak Ridge National Laboratory Report
No. ORNL-5040 (corrected), January 1978.
32. Where There Is No Doctor, David Werner,
Hesperian Foundation, Palo Alto, Calif., 1977.
33. Personal communications from Colonel C
Blanchard Henry, M.D., Binghamton, N.Y., to
Cresson H. Kearny in 1963.
34. Emergency Medical Treatment, TM-II-8,
Federal Civil Defense Administration, U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office, April 1953.
35. "The Radiation Studies Begin," Science,
Vol. 204, p. 281, 1979.
36. Protection of the Thyroid Gland in the
Event ofReleases ofRadioiodine, National Council
on Radiation Protection and Measurements, NCRP
Report No. 55, Washington, D.C 20014, August I,
1977.
37. Accidental Radioactive Contamination of
Human andAnimalFeeds andPotassium Iodideasa
Thyroid-Blocking Agent in a Radiation Emergency,
Food and Drug Administration, Federal Register,
December '15, 1978, pp. 58790-58800.
38, Civil Defense, N. I. Akimov et aI., Moscow,
1969, ORNLjtr-2306, Oak Ridge National Labora-
torytranslation, April 1971.
39. "Frantic Team Efforts Brought Vital Chem-
ical to Stricken Plant," Robert Reinhold, New York
Times, April 4, 1979, p. A16.
40. Trans-Pacific Fallout and Protective Coun-
termeasures, Cresson H. Kearny, Oak Ridge Na-
tional Laboratory Report No. 4900, November 1973.
41. Letter dated May 23,1979 from William H.
Wilcox, Administrator, Federal Disaster Assistance
Administration, Washington, D.C to Robert A.
Levetown, Washington Representative ofthe Ameri-
can Civil Defense Association.
42. Historical Instances of Extreme Over-
crowding, Bureau of Social Science Research, Inc.,
Report No. 354-5, March 1963.
43. After-Action Report, Operation Labora-
tory Shelter, Headquarters U.S. Army XXIV
Airborne Corps, Ft. Bragg, N.C, 1970.Selected Index
Definitions and explanations of terms are given on the listed pages. Because some terms are
mentioned on up to 55 different pages, all pages on which some terms are listed are not included.
For broad categories of information, see the Contents page.
Abnormalities from radiation. 16. 43. 44
Aerosol filters for biological warfare. 272
Air burst. 15. 16
Air pumps. seeKAP. alsoseeVentilation'
Air-slap of an air-blast wave. 259
Alpha radiation (or particles). and protection against. 44
Anhydrite. 26. 219
Atoms. radioactive. 12. 43. 44
Attack Warning Signal. 23
Attenuation of radiation. 14.39
Auroras. artificial. 20
Batteries. conserving. 26. 100. 101
Beliefs, false re nuclear'war, 5
Benches and bunks for shelters
expedient, 117. 118
permanent. 144. 145
Bequerel (Bq), 96
Beta burns. and prevention of. 43. 44. 130. 131
Beta radiation (or particles). and protection against. 43. 44.
130
Biological warfare aerosol filters. 272
Biological weapons. 8
Blast
areas. 29. 31. 213
doors. 252-255
effects, 15. 16. 28. 64
effects at distances from GZ. 28
injuries to eardrums and lungs. 252
negative phase (or negative pressure). 254-25'1'
positive phase (or overpressure). 16.65.252
protector logs, 253-255
tests. 61
valve. expedient. 256. 257
wave. 24
wind. 63. 64
wind erosion. 245
Blindness. flash. 44
Bodies, disposal of. 105
Bombers. enemy, 25
Bq (bequerel), 96
Bucket Stove. 79-82
Burns
from beta radiations (or particles). 43. 44,130
from heated air. 45
from the popcorning effect. 44, '45
from thermal pulse (heat rays) causing flash burns. 43. 44
of the eye. 44
Bursts. nuclear
air. 15
high altitude. 20
surface. 11
Cancer from gamma radiation (ray) doses
from trans-Pacific fallout. 152
risk estimates. 110. 111. 152-154
Candle-lamps. 149
Candles. 149
Canopies over entries. 41. 158. 159
Car. loading for evacuation. 34
Carbon dioxide, dangers from
fires, 61
respiration (exhaled breath). 53. 56
Carbon monoxide. dangers from
candles. 149
fires. 56. 61.64. 65. 138. 148
smoking. 53
Cesium. radioactive. 76
cfm (cubic feet per minute) of air needed. 51-53. 59. 60
Chair. Bedsheet. 119-124
Chemical weapons. 8
Chernobyl disaster. 112. 152-154
Chimney effect (for ventilation). 51, 52
Chinese test explosion's worldwide fallout. 151. 152
Civil defense
American (budget only). 6
Chinese. 58. 63. 71. 248-252
Russian. 6. 7.18.56,57.65
Swiss. 6
Clothing and footwear. expedient
beta burns. protection against. 43. 44. 130. 131
cold weather. 125-127
keeping warm without fire. 129
mask, fallout. 130. 131
rainwear, including rain chaps. 129
sandals, 129. 130
winter footwear: 127. 128
Cooking and heating in a permanent shelter. 148. 149
Cooking. expedient
Bucket Stove, 79-82
Fireless Cooker. 82.148
grain and beans. 82. 83
wheat balls and corn balls. 148. 149
Crater of explosion, 11. 12
Crisis
evacuation. 6. 31
preparations made during. 6
simulation during field tests, 36
Cuban Missile Crisis. 5
Cutting trees and poles. 157. 158
Decay. radioactive. 12. 13
Defense Nuclear Agency blast tests. 68. 244
Diarrhea. 77
Diets. seeFood
Digging with pick and shovel. 156
Directional Fanning (ventilation)
importance of. 58
instructions, 59. 60
Distillation of water. 72
Doors. blast. expedient. 252-255
Dose. radiation. 12.30.39. 110. 111
Dose rate, radiation. 12. 13
Dose rate meters (survey meters). 12.94
commercial sources. 96. 97
homemade. seeKFM
war reserves of. 95
Dosimeters. 12, 94. 95
commercial sources. 96. 97
war reserves. 95
Dragging logs and poles, 157
Dresden firestorm. 65
Earth arching. 42
Earth rolls (earth-filled rolls). 156, 157
EBS (Emergency Broadcasting System). 23
Effective Temperature (ET). 52, 53
Electric power vulnerabilities. 23. 24. 47. 72
Electromagnetic pulse (EMP)
effects. 23. 24
NAWAS. unprotected against EMP. 22
protection against. 23. 26
Emergency Broadcasting System (EBS). 23
Emergency Operating Center (EOC), 23
EMP. seeelectromagnetic pulse
End of mankind propaganda. 5, 11. 16-19
Entrance (entryway) cover. 275, 276
Entries. vertical. for shelters.
expedient. 41.174,175.249-252
permanent. 142-144,273-275ET (Effective Temperature). 52. 53
Evacuation. 27-35
by car, 34
check list. 32. 33
during crisis. 6. 31
spontaneous. 31
whether to. 31. 32. 47
Exit. emergency. 142-144
Exit housing. multi-purpose. 273-275
Exotic weapons. 8
"Expedient". definition of. 5
Fallout
attenuation (by shielding) of fallout radiation. 16. 39
beta burns from fallout. 43
clouds. 28. 55
clouds. stabilized. 27. 28
decay (of fallout radiation dose rate). 12.43
deposition. times required for, 12. 13. 55
extent of. 25
high-risk areas. 29
highest-risk areas. 29
local. 15 .
origins of. 12
particles. 12. 43. 54. 55
patterns. 27
Trans-Pacific. 113. 151-154
weathering of. 13
Fallout masks. expedient, 130. 131
Fallout (radiation) meters, see Dose rate meters. also see
Dosimeters
Famine relief by trucked grain, 74
Fear. 20
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 6
FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). 6
Fertility after nuclear war. 16. 76
Field tests (families building expedient shelters). 35. 36-42.
50. 155
Filter, and homemade filter box, 271, 272·
Fire
carbon dioxide. fire-caused dangers. 61
carbon monoxide. 53. 54. 56. 61
causes of. 64
dangers. relative. 61. 64
easily ignitable materials. 14
forest and brush. 61
homes. 48. 62
oxygen depletion by, 61
protective measures. including whitewashing. 61. 63
secondary causes after blast. 61, 64
thermal radiation (ignition from fireball), 61, 62
urban. 61. 65
Fireball. 11. 15.44.61,62
Fireless Cookers, 82, 148
Firestorms, 14,61.65
Flash blindness. 44
Flash burns. 44
Food
baby foods. emergency. 89-91
basic survival ration to store. 88. 89. 147
contamination by fallout. and decontamination. 16
expedient processing. 77-79
flotation. of grain hulls, 78
grain and bean diets. 83-85. 88. 89
loss of animals. 75
meat. precautions post-attack. 75
minimum needs. 75. 76
multi-year storage. foods for. 88
nutrients. essential. expedient ways to provide
animal protein. minimum requirement. 87
fat, 87
iron. 87
niacin and calcium. 86. 87
vitamin A. 86
vitamin C, 84-86
vitamin D, 86
Food (continued)
one year supply. 146-148
requirements. daily. 84. 85
reserves in U,S,. 87. 88
salt requirements. 53. 66. 83-86. 92
sieving husks from flour and meal. 78
sprouting. 85. 86
storage. 88-92. 105. 146
survival ration. basic. to store. 88. 89. 147
Footwear. expedient. 127-129
Furnishings for shelters
Bedsheet-Chair, 124
Bedsheet-Hammock. 119-123
benches. seats. and bunks. 117, 118. 144
Gamma radiation (rays). 14.38-40.94
Genetic damage from radiation. 16
Glass windows, dangers from. 24. 25
Grain mills
expedient. 77
hand-cranked. 148
Grains. grinding with farm machinery. 78
Gray (Gy) (unit of absorbed radiation dose). 96
Ground zero (GZ). 15 .
Halving-thickness of shielding material. 13. 14
Hammock. Bedsheet-. 119-123
Hvbomb, 43
Help from fellow Americans. 21
Hewing flat. square sides on logs, 253. 255
Hiroshima. 15. 16.44.61.64.244
survivors. 21
warning. inadequate. 22
Hot-spots of radiation. 55
ICBM (Intercontinental Ballistic Missile), 23-25
sites. 29. 30
"In Time of Emergency". 45. 57
Infection prevention. 103-107
Initial nuclear radiation (from fireball). 15.257-259
Insects. control by screens. etc.. 51. 101. 104. 106. 141
Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM), 23-25
Iodine. tincture of. as prophylactic on skin. 116
Iodine. radioactive. 60. 72. 111-115, 152-154
KAP (Kearny Air Pump). expedient
advantages proven by tests, 50-54
instructions. complete. for making and using, 193-212
KFM (Kearny Fallout Meter). expedient dose rate meter
advantages proven by tests. 97-99
instructions, complete with patterns. for making and
using. 213-239
instructions. with tabloid layout sheet. for tabloid repro-
ductions of the KFM instructions. 241-242
needed materials andtools: onlythosefound in millions of
homes. 97,218. 219
untrained Americans who have made KFMs. 97, 99. 194
Kearny Air Pump. see KAP
Kearny Fallout Meter. see KFM
KI. see Potassium iodide
Kiloton (KT). 17
Lamps, commercial. 101
Lamps, expedient. 101. 102
Life-support equipment for shelters, 45
Light for shelters
candles, 101. 149
electric. with batteries and bulbs. 100. 101
daylight. through exit housing. 275
for permanent shelter. 149. 150
lamps. expedient. 101. 102
minimum needed, 100
Log dragging. 157
MAD (Mutual Assured Destruction). 6
Mask. expedient. fallout and dust. 43. 54. 130. 131Megaton (MT), 14
Midgetman, 55
MIRV, Multiple Independently-targeted Reentry Vehicle,
27
Mutual Assured Destruction (MAD), 6
Myths about nuclear war, 11-19
l\1agasaki,13,15-17,21,44,243
National Academy of Sciences, findings and recommenda-
tions, 16, 53, 54, 110
1\1ational Shelter Survey (I\1SS), 47
National Warning System (I\1AWAS), 22
l\1ausea,65
Navy shelter-occupancy tests, 52, 53
I\1AWAS (National Warning System), 22
Neglect, benign, 108, 109
Neutron warheads, 8
I\1SS (National Shelter Survey), 47
Nuclear attacks, types of, 7
Nuclear explosions, limits on destructiveness, 15-17
Nuclear weapons, accuracy and targets, 7
"Nuclear winter" theory, 17-19
Occupancy field tests of expedient shelters, ;;;1, 52,117-119
Occupancy field tests of permanent shelters, 52, 53, 66, 106
Overkill, 16, 17
Oxygen, lack of, 61
Paralysis, emotional, 20, 21
Pellagra, 86
PF (protection factor), 14,29,42; 134
Picocurie, 154
Plutonium, 43
Poles and logs, cutting and dragging, 157, 158'
Popcorning effect, skin burns, 44, 45
Population relocation (crisis evacuation), 6, 31
Potassium iodide (KI)
doses for thyroid protection during and after nuclear war,
113,114,116,
doses for thyroid protection during and after peacetime
nuclear accidents, 111-113, 116
expedient ways to prepare and take, 115, 116
FDA official patient information, 112, 113
prophylactic use for protection against Trans-Pacific
fallout, 152, 153
ways to obtain, 114
Protection factor (PF), 14,29,42, 134
"Protection in the Nuclear Age", 45, 57
psi (pounds per square inch), 15
Psychology ofSurvival, 20, 21
Public shelters, 47, 48
Pump, Double-Action Piston, instructions for making and
ventilating shelters with, 261-270
Punkah (fan), 50
R (roentgen), 94,110
Rad,ll0
Radiation doses
delayed effects, 13
genetic injuries from, 16
lethal, 13, 94
lifetime risks from, 110, 111
non-incapacitating, 13
whole-body, 13
Radiation meters for measuring fallout
commercially available models, 96
critical need for, 94
KFM (expedient), see KFM
maintenance and calibration of factory made meters, 97
war reserves, 95
warnings to buyers, 95
Radiation sickness, 110, 111
Radiation world wide effects, 110
Radioactive decay, 12
Radios, how to keep operating, 26
Rain-outs (of fallout particles), 29, 55
Rainwear, 129
Rem, 110
Respiratory diseases, control of, 107
Risk areas, high, highest, 29-31
Roentgen (R), 94, 110
Runways, long, targeted, 24
Russian civil defense, 6, 7, 18,56,57,65
Salt requirements, 53, 66, 83-86
Sanitation in shelters, expedient
disposal of corpses, 105
disposal of excrement and urine, 104, 105
disposal of vomit, 105
food, 105, 106
insect control, 104, 106, 141
personal possessions, 106
Scavenging of fallout particles, 55
Screens, insect, 44, 106, 141
Scurvy, 84, 85
SDI (Strategic Defense Initiative), 5
Seeds to store, 92, 93
Shelter Survey, National (I\1SS), 47
Shelter types, advantages and disadvantages of, 47-49
Shelters
as post-attack homes, 273-276
needs often overlooked, 150
practice living in, 150
Shelters, blast, expedient, 7, 49
construction principles, 245-255
doors, 252-255
entryways, 242-252
increasing importance of, 243
tests of, 244-246, 248
ventilation, 255
Shelters, blast, permanent, 7, 49
Shelters,fallout, againstbetaand alpharadiation(particles),
43,44
Shelters, fallout, expedient, 7
basement, 45, 46 ,
building experiments, 36-42
building instructions, general, 155-159
Car-Over-Trench, 54
earth-covered (shielded), 35, 36, 47-49, 65
instructions, detailed, for six types, see Contents page
snow-covered (shielded). 48, 158
Shelters, fallout, official civil defense (FEMA) instructions,
45
Shelters, fallout, permanent, 7
Shelters, fallout, permanent family, 134-150
Shelters, fallout, public, 47, 48
Shielding -
barrier, 39
geometry, 39, 40
Shielding materials, halving thicknesses, 13, 14
Shock wave (blast wave), 44
Sievert (Sv) (dose equivalent), 96
Skin diseases, prevention of, 106, 107
Skyshine, 39, 41
SLBM, targets of and arrival times, 23-25, 31
Snow for shielding, 158
Snow-outs (of fallout), 55
Soviet nuclear strategy, 27
Star Wars, 5
Stove, expedient, for cooking and heating, 79-82
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), 5
Strontium, radioactive, 76
Submarine launchedballistic missiles(SLBMs), andtargets
of, 23-25, 31
Surface burst, 11
Survey meters (dose rate meters), 12,94,96,97
Surviving without doctors (self-help), 108-116
Sv (Sievert) (dose equivalent), 96
Swiss civil defense budget, 6
Tactical warning, 22, 24
Targets, probable, 16,29,31
Television and EMP, 23, 24
Temperature, effective, 52
Terror, 20
Thermal (heat) radiation from fireball
ignitions by, 14,61-63 '
other effects, 44
protective measures, 61-63Thirst. 66
Three Mile Island accident. 152
Thumb-test for stable earth. 155
Thyroid abnormalities. damage to
Marshall Islanders. 111
by other exposures to radioactive iodine. 111. 152
Thyroid abnormalities. prevention of
by means other than prophylactic potassium iodide. 115.
116
by prophylactic potassium iodide. seePotassium iodide
Toilets. expedient. 103. 104
Toxins. bacterial, 75
Transistors; EMP damage. 26
Tree felling. 157
Trench digging. 156
Tunnel shelters at Nagasaki. 15
Ultraviolet. post-attack. exaggerations of dangers. 17
Urination and water. minimum needs. 66
Ventilation. shelter. safe times for stopping. 272
Ventilation/cooling of shelters
cold weather. 53
cooling before occupying. 54
filtered air. 54
forced. byexpedientairpumps.seeRAP. alsoseeDirectional
Fanning. alsoseeAppendix E
hot weather. 52. 53
inhalation dangers. 54. 55
natural. 53
need for shelter air pumps. 193. 194
requirements. 50-53. 56
through multi-purpose exit housing. 273. 274
warnings re official instructions. 56-58
without filters. 54
Vitamins. expedient ways to provide
niacin. 86. 87
vitamin A. 86
vitamin C. 84-86
vitamin D. 86
Vomiting. 104
Warnings of attack. 22-25
given by the attack itself. 23-25
how to respond to. 25
NAWAS. 22. 23
.types of. 22
Water. 66-74
bags. expedient. for carrying and storing. 66-66
bail-can for wells. 71
disinfecting
boiling. 70
chlorine bleach. 69. 70
tincture of iodine. 2%. 70
filtering. including removal of radioactivity. 71-74
minimum needs. 66
permanent shelter. supplies for. 145. 146
requirements. 66
salt needs with. 66
siphoning. 69. 70
sources. 71
storage pits. 66
storing for years. 145
storing in expedient containers. 67-69
Weathering effects. reducing fallout hazards. 13
Windows. dangers from shattered glass. 24. 25
X rays. 12..13