plied, and body heat raises the air temperature
several additional degrees.• Distribute the air quite evenly throughout the
shelter. Ina trench shelter, where airispumped inat one
end and flows out the other, good distribution is
assured. Inlarger shelters, such as basements,ventilating
air willmove from the air-supplyopeningstraight to the
air-exhaust opening. Persons out of this air stream will
not be adequately cooled. By using one or more
additional, smallerKAPs (also described in Appendix
B), fresh air can be distributed easily throughout large
shelter rooms, and the occupants will be gently fanned.
• Provide occupants with adequate drinking water
and salt. In extremely hot weather, this means 4 quarts
of water per day per person and Itablespoon(10grams)
of salt, including the salt in food.
• Wear as few clothes as practical. When the skin is
bare, moving air can evaporate sweat more efficiently
for effective cooling. Air movement can keep bare skin
drier,and therefore lesssusceptible to heat rash and skin
infections. In the inadequately ventilated Navy test
shelter, 34ofthe99 initially healthyyoung men had heat
rash and 23had more seriousskin complaints at the end
of their sweaty two-week confinement, although their
overall physical condition had not deteriorated.IS How-
ever, at sick callevery day allofthese Navy test
subjects with skin complaints were treated by
medical corpsmen. In a nuclear war, very few
shelteroccupantswould have medicines to treat
skin diseases and infections, that if not taken
care of usually worsen rapidly under continu-
ously hot, humid conditions. Simple means for
preventingskin diseases andinfections-means
proved very effective by jungle natives and by
our best trained jungle infantrymen in World
War II - are described in the Prevention of Skin
Diseases section of Chapter 12.
• Keep pumping about 40 cfm of air per person
through the shelter both day and night during hot
weather, so that the occupants and the shelter itself will
be cooled off at night. In the Navy test, the ventilation
rate of 7 to 12 cfm was not high enough to give
occupantsthe partial relief from heat and sweatingthat
people normally get at night.'> In a National Academy
of Sciences meeting on protective shelters, an authority
stated: "Laboratoryexperimentsand fieldinvestigations
have shown that healthy persons at rest can tolerate
daily exposures to ETs [effective temperatures] up to
90°F, provided they can get a good night's sleep in a
coolerenvironment."14 An effectivetemperature90°F is
higher than the highest outdoor effective temperature
during a heatwave in the South or in American deserts.
ADEQUATE VENTILATION IN
COLD WEATHER
Infreezing weather, a belowground sheltercovered
with damp earth may continue to absorb almost all of
its occupants' body heat for many days and stay
unpleasantly cold. In one winter test of such a fully
occupied shelter,the temperature ofthe humidairinthe
shelterremainedaround 50°F.16 Undersuch conditions,
shelter occupants should continue to ventilate their
shelter adequately, to avoid the following conditions:
• A dangerous buildup of carbon dioxide from
exhaled breath, the first symptoms of which are
headaches and deeper breathing.
• Headaches from the carbon monoxide produced
by smoking. When the ventilation rate is low, smoking
should not be permitted,even nearthe exhaust opening.
• Headaches, collapse, or death due to carbon
monoxide from open fires or gasoline lanterns that
release gases into the shelter air.
NATURAL VENTILATION
Enough air usually will be blown through an
aboveground shelter if sufficiently large openings are
provided on opposite sides and if there is any breeze.
But if the weather is warm and still and the shelter
crowded, the temperature-humidity conditions soon
can become unbearable.
Adequate natural ventilation for belowground
shelters is more difficult. Even if there isa light breeze,
not much air willmakea right-angleturnandgo downa
vertical entry, make another right-angle turn, and then
flow througha trench or othershelterpartially obscured
by people and supplies.
In cool weather, occupants' body heat will warm
the shelter air and make it lighter than the outdoor air.
