 is on survival
preparations that could be made in the last few days of
a worsening CrISIS.
The author wrote the original, uncopy-
righted Nuclear War Survival Skills while working
as a research engineer at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. As a result, he has no proprietory
rights and has gotten nothing but satisfaction
from past sales. Nor will he gain materially
from future sales, as can be judged by reading
his copyrightnotice coveringthis edition. Civil
defense professionals andothersconcerned with
providing better self-help survival information
can reproduce parts or all of this 1987 edition
without getting permission from anyone, pro-
vided they comply with the terms of the copy-
right notice.Foreword
There are two diametrically opposite views on
civil defense. Russian official policy holds that civil
defense isfeasible even in anuclear war. American
official policy, or at any rate the implementation of
that policy, is based on the assumption that civil
defense is useless.
The Russians, having learned a bitter lesson in
the second world war, have bent every effort to
defend their people under all circumstances. They
are spending several billion dollars per year on this
activity. They have effective plans to evacuate their
cities before they let loose a nuclear strike. They
have strong shelters for the people who must
remain in the cities:They are building up protected
food reserves to tide them over a critical period.
All this may mean that in a nuclear exchange,
which we must try to avoid or to deter, the Russian
deaths would probably not exceed ten million.
Tragic assuch a figure is, the Russian nation would
survive. If they succeed in eliminating the United
States they can commandeer food, machinery and
manpower from the rest of the world. They could
recover rapidly. They would have attained their
goal: world domination.
In the American view the Russian plan is
unfeasible. Those who argue on this side point out
the great power of nuclear weapons. In this they
are right. Their argument is particularly impressive
in its psychological effect.
But this argument has never been backed up
by a careful quantitative analysis which takes into
account the planned dispersal and sheltering of
the Russian population and the other measures
which the Russians have taken and those to which
they are committed.
That evacuation of our own citizens can be
extremely useful if we see that the Russians are
evacuating is simple common sense. With the use
of American automobiles an evacuation could be
faster and more effective than is possible in Russia.
To carry it out we need not resort to the totalitarian
methods of the iron curtain countries. It will suffice
to warn our people and advise them where to go,
how to protect themselves. The Federal Emergency
Management Administration contains the begin-
nings on which such a policy might be built.
The present book does not,and indeed cannot,
make the assumption that such minimal yet
extremely useful government guidance will be
available. Instead it outlines the skills that in-
dividuals or groups of individuals can learn and
apply in order to improve their chances of survival.
This book is not adescription of civil defense.
It is a guide to "Stop-gap" civil defense which
individuals could carry out for themselves, if need
be, with no expenditures by our government. It
fills the gap between the ineffective civil defense
that we havetoday and the highly effective survival
preparations that we could and should have a few
years from now. However, if we go no further than
what we can do on the basisof this book, then the
United States cannot survive a major nuclear war.
Yet this book, besides being realisticand objec-
tively correct, serves two extremely important pur-
poses. One is: it will help to save lives. The second
purpose is to show that with relatively inexpensive
governmental guidance and supplies, an educated
American public could, indeed, defend itself. We
could survive a nuclear war and remain a nation.
This is an all-important goal. Its most practical
aspect lies in the fact that the men in the Kremlin
are cautious. If they cannot count on destroying us
they probably will never launch their nuclear
arsenal against us. Civil defense isat once the most
peaceful and the most effective deterrent of
nuclear war.
Some may argue that the Russians could
evacuate again and again and thus, by forcing us
into similar moves, exhaust us. I believe that in
reality they would anger us sufficiently so that we
would rearm in earnest. That is not what the
Russians want to accomplish.
Others may say that the Russians could strike
without previous evacuation. 