dangers. Scrap lumber cut into short lengths,
made into bundles and stored in plastic bags,
occupies minimum spaceand staysdry. Keep a
saw and a hatchet in your shelter.
• Bucket Stove: The most efficient, practical
and safe stove with which to cook or heat for
weeks or months in a family shelteris a Bucket
Stove, that burns either small pieces of wood or
small "sticks" of twisted newspaper. (See the
Food chapter.) Especially if you believe that
you mayhaveto live inyourshelterfor months
or that your normal fuel will not be available
after a'nuclear attack, you should make and
store at least two Bucket Stoves.
• An improved Fireless Cooker: To save a
great deal of fuel and time, particularly with
slow-cooking grains and beans, make a very
well insulated Fireless Cooker similar to the
expedient one described on page 82 of the Food
chapter. Make a plywood box, first measuring
carefully to insure that, when completely lined
with 4 inches of styrofoam, the styrofoam will
fit closelyaround a large, liddedpotwrappedin
a bath towel. An excellent Fireless Cooker is a
war survival asset that also is useful for peace-
time cooking.
(To boil about twice as much wheat flour-
meal in a given pot as can be boiled when
making wheat mush, and to use the minimum
amount of water and fuel, salt a batch of the
flour-meal, add enough water while working it
to make a stiff dough, then make dough balls
about 11/2 inches in diameter, and roll them in
flour-meal. Drop the wheat balls into enough
boilingwaterto coverthem, andboilata rolling
boilfor 10minutes. Then puttheboiling-hotpot
in a well insulated Fireless Cooker for several
hours. Cornballscan be made andboiledinthismanner, also without the almost constant stir-
ring required when boiling a mush made of
home-ground flour-meal.)
• A sturdyworkbench: Inthecornerunderthe
emergencyexitbuild a work bench, securedto a
wall, on which to cook and to which you can
attach your grain mill, A bench36 inches high,
42 inches wide, and 30 inches deep will serve.
(The other corner at the air-exhaust end of the
shelter should be the curtained-off toilet and
bathing area.)
• Verywarmclothing,footwear,andbedding:
Heating a well ventilated shelter usually is
unnecessary even .in freezing weather if the
occupantshavetheseessentials for livinginthe
cold, or if they have the materials'needed to
make at least as good expedient means for
retaining body heat as are described in Chapter
15. The author has felt the warm hands of little
Chinesechildrenwearingpaddedclothingwhile
living in their below freezing homes, where
there was scarcely enough straw, grass, and
twigs to cook with. Ifyou store plenty of strong
thread and large needles in your shelter, you
can make warm clothing out of blankets - as
some frontier settlers did to survive the sub-
zero winters of Montana.
LIGHT
• White paint: To make a little light go a long
way, paint the walls, ceiling, floor, and fur-
nishings pure white.
• Candles: Themostdependable andeconomi-
cal lights for a family shelter are long-burning
candles. The best candle tested by the author is
the 15-hour candle manufactured by the Reed
Candle Company of San Antonio, Texas and
sold by the millions in New Mexico each
Christmas season for use in outdoor decorative
"Iuminarias". This votive-type, short candle is
not perfumed and has a wick supported by a
small piece of metal attached to its base, so that
the wick remains uprightandcontinues to burn
if the wax melts and no longer supports it. If
burned in one of the candle-lamps described
below, this candle gives enough lightto read by
for 15 hours.
The author has been able to find only one
mail order source of 15-hour candles like those
sold by the millions in New Mexico: Prepared-
ness Products, 3855 South 500 West, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84115. A case of 144 candles sells for
$49.00, FOB in 1990. When UPS shippingcharges
are added, the delivered costis between'35and40
cents for each 15-hour candle, depending on the
distance shipped.
