modate the sheltering requirements," and
"The thicker the protective layer of earth, the greater
the ability to. resist blast waves.t"
• Shore earth walls to prevent their caving in as a
result of ground shock and earth pressure. Most
unshored (that is, unsupported) earth walls are
partially collapsed by ground shock at much lower
blast overpressuresthanthoseat which a flexible roof
protected by earth arching isdamaged. Figure 0.5 is '
a picture of a seated dummy taken by a high-speed
movie camera mounted inside an unshored, Pole-
Covered Trench Shelter of the Russian type tested at
the 20-psi range. (A second dummy was obscured by
blast-torncurtains made of blankets.) The shelter had
an open stairway entryway, positioned at right angles
to the stand-up-height trench and facing away from
the targeted "city"so as to minimize the entry of blast
waves and blast wind.
Fig. 0.5. A dummy in an unshored Pole-
Covered Trench Shelter as it is struck by collapsing
rock-like earth walls. The photo also shows the
shelter's blanket-curtains as they are torn and blown
into the shelter by the 180-mph blast wind.
(Immediately after this photo was taken, the
dummies were hit by the airborne blast wave and
blast wind. Outside, the blast wind peaked at about
490 mph.)
Figure 0.6 is a post-blast view of the essentially
undamaged earth-covered roof poles and the
disastrously collapsed, unshored shelter walls of the
Russian shelter tested at 20 psi." Russian civil
defense books state that unshored fallout shelters do
not survive closer to the blast than the 7-psi
overpressure range. This limitationwas confirmed by
an identical shelter tested at 7 psi; parts of its
unshored walls were quite badly collapsed by the
ground shock from an explosion producing merely
l-kiloton blast effects.
Fig. 0.6. Dummies after ground shock from
l-kiloton blast effects at the 20-psi range had
collapsed the rock-like walls ofa hardeneddesert soil
called caliche. The dummies' steel "bones" and
"joints" prevented them from being knocked down
and buried. The fallen caliche all around them kept
them from being blown overby the airblast wave and
180-mph blast wind that followed.
Unsupported earth walls should be sloped as
much as practical. The length and strength of
available roofing material should be considered and,
in order to attain effective earth arching, the
thickness of the earth cover should be at least halfas
great as the distance between the edges of the trench.
The stability of the earth determines the proper
method for shoring the walls of a trench. shelter.
Methods for shoring both loose, unstable earth and
firm, stable earth are described below:
*In loose, unstable earth such as sand, the
walls of all underground shelters must be shored.
First, an oversized trench must be dug with gently
sloping sides. Next, the shoring is built, often as a
freestanding, roofless structure. Then earth must bebackfilled around the shoring to a level a few inches
higher than the uppermost parts of the shoring, as in
Fi.g. 0.7. Finally, the roof poles or planks must be
placed so that they are supported only by the
backfilled earth. Blast tests have indicated that a
Pole-Covered Trench Shelter thus proportioned and
lightly shored should protect its occupants against
disastrous collapse of its wallsat overpressure ranges
up to 15 psi.
• In firm, stable earth, it is best first to dig a
trench a few incheswider than 7feet(the length ofthe
roof poles) and I foot deep. Next, dig the part to be
shored, down the center of this shallow trench, using
the dimensions given for the shoring in Fig. 0.7. The
trench walls should be sloped and smoothed quite
accurately, so that the shoring can be tightened
againsttheearth. Iftheshoringdoesnotpresstightl~
against the trench walls,large wedges ofearth may be
jarred loose, hit the shoring, and cause it to collapse.
A different, comparativelysimple way to tighten
shoring is indicated by Fig. 0.8. 