TH ESES r(,) THROUGH (40)] ARE PASTE-UPS CUT OUT OF THE INSTRUCTIONS PAGES
N.p.
NAppendix D
Expedient Blast Shelters
I~CREA~NGIMPORTANCE
The majority of urban and suburban Americans
would need blast shelters to avoid death or injury if
they did not evacuate before an all-out nuclear attack.
As nuclear arsenals continue to grow, an increasing
majority would need the protection of blast shelters. In
an attack on militarily relevant targets, as much
as 5o/c; of the total area of the 48 states could be
subjected to blast damage severe enough to destroy or
damage homes - depending on the number of
warheads assigned to each hard target, weapon
reliability, etc. If blast shelters affording protection up
to the 15-pounds-per-square-inch (15 psi) overpressure
range were available to everybody and were occu-
pied at the time of attack, the great majority of
the occupants would survive all blast, fire, and
radiation effects in the blast areas subjected to
less than 15-psi blast effects.
Fifteen-psi blast shelters will survive as
close as about 1.5 miles from ground zero of a
1-megaton surface burst, and about 2.3 miles
from ground zero or a 1-megaton air burst.
Except in high-density urban areas where the
air supply openings andexits of shelters are all
too likelyto be coveredwith blast-hurleddebris,
the area in which people inside good earth-
covered 15-psi blast shelters would be killed
would be onlyabout 1/6th as large as theareain
which most people sheltered in typicalAmeri-
can homes probably would die from blast and
fire effects alone.
Blast tests have indicated that the Small-
Pole Shelter (the most blast-resistant of the
earth-covered expedient shelters described in
Appendix A) should enable its occupants to
surviveup to the50-psioverpressure range - if
built with the blast-resistant and radiation-
protective features described in following sec-
tions, and if located outside an urban area.
Calculations show that this earth-covered ex-
pedient blast shelter also would give adequate
protection atthe50-psiblastoverpressure range
againstthe intenseinitialnuclearradiationthat
is emitted from the fireball of a 1-megaton
explosion. However, to make this shelter (see
page 258) provide adequate protection against
the even more intense initial nuclear radiation
that would reach the 50-psi overpressure range
from thefireballofa500-kilotonorsmallerexplo-
sion, it should have at least 6 feet ofearth cover
and additional cans of water should be kept
ready to be placed in the horizontal parts of the
entrywayspromptlyafterthe shelterisoccupied.
The life-saving potential of well designed, well
built blast shelters is a demonstrated fact. Millions of
Americans living in high-risk areas would be able to
build expedient blast shelters within only a few days-
provided they weregivenfield-tested instructions,
had made some preparations before the crisis
arose, had a few days of recognized warning,
and during the crisis were motivated by the
President. The following information is given in the
hope ofencouraging more Americans to make prepara-
tions for blast protection. Also, it may serve to increase
the number who realize the need for permanent blast
shelters in high-risk blast areas.
Some informed citizens-particularly those who
live near large cities or in their outer suburbs-may
choose to build earth-covered expedient blast shelters
in their backyards, rather than to evacuate. Going into
a strange area and trying to build or find good shelter
. and otheressentials of lifewould entail risks that many
people might hesitate to take, particularly if they live
outside the probable areas of severe blast damage. For
such citizens, the best decision might be to stay at
home, build earth-covered expedient blast shelters,
supplythem with the essentials for long occupancy, and
remain with their possessions.
The following descriptions of the characteristics
and components of expedient blast shelters should
enable many readers to use locally available materials
to provide at least 15-psi blast protection. Pre-crisis
preparations are essential, as wellas the abilityto work
veryhard for two to four days. (Field-tested instructions
are not yet available; to date only workers who were
supervised have built expedient blast shelters.