 atoms and molecules in
their internal organs. The thyroid gland, kidneys,
and liver especially should not be eaten.
If an animal appears to be sick, it should not be
eaten. The animal might be sufferingfrom a sickening
or fatal radiation dose and might have developed a
bacterial infection as a result of this dose. Meat
contaminated with the toxins produced by some
kinds of bacteria could cause severe illness or death
if eaten, even if thoroughly cooked.Under cnsis conditions, all meat should be
cooked until it is extremely well done-cooked long
past the time when it loses the last of its pink color.
To be sure that the center of each piece of meat is
raised to boiling temperature, the meat should be cut
into pieces that are less than Ih-inch thick before
cooking. This precaution also reducescooking time
and saves fuel.
SURVIVAL OF BREEDING STOCK
Extensive areas of the United States would not
receive fallout heavy enough to kill grazing animals.
The millions of surviving animals would provide
some food and the fertile breeding stock needed for
national recovery. The loss 'of fertility caused by
severe radiation doses is rarely permanent. Extensive
experiments with animals have shown that the
offspring of severely irradiated animals are healthy
and fertile."
LIVING ON BASIC PLANT FOODS
Even if almost all food-producing animals were
lost, most surviving Americans should be able to
live on the foods that enable most of the world's
population to live and multiply: grains, beans, and
vegetables. And because of the remarkable produc-
tivity of American agriculture, there usually would
be enough grain and beans in storage to supply
surviving Americans with sufficient food for at least
a year following a heavy nuclear attack." The
problem would be to get the unprocessed foods,
which are stored in food-producing regions, to the
majority of survivors who would be outside these
regions.
Surprisingly little transportation would be
needed to carry adequate quantities of these un-
processed foods to survivors in famine areas. Asingle
large trailer truck can haul 40,000 pounds of
wheat-enough to keep 40,000 people from feeling
hunger pains for a day. More than enough such
trucks and the fuel needed to carry basic foods to
food-short areas would survive a massive nuclear
attack." It is likely that reasonably strong American
leadership and morale would prevail so that, after
the first few weeks, millions of the survivors in
starving areas should receive basic unprocessed
foods.
Eating food produced in the years after a large
attack would cause an increase in the cancer rate,
due primarily to its content of radioactive strontium
and cesium from fallout-contaminated soil. Over the
first 30 years following an attack, this increasewould
be a small fraction ofthe number ofadditionalcancer
deaths that would result from external radiation."
Cancer deaths would be one of the tragic, delayed
costs of a nuclear war, but all together would not be
numerous enough to endangerthe long-term survival
of the population.
LIVE OFF THE LAND?
Very few survivors of a heavy attack would be
in areas where they could live off the land like
primitive hunters and gatherers. In extensive areas
where fallout would not be heavy enough to kill
human beings, wild creatures would die from the
combi-ned effects 'of external gamma radiation,
swallowed fallout particles, and beta burns on their
bodies. Survival plans should not includedependence
on hunting, fishing, or gathering wild plants.
FOOD FOR SHELTER OCCUPANTS
Most people would need very little food to live
several weeks; however, the time when survivors
of blast and fallout would leave their shelters would
mark the beginning of a much longer period of
privation and hard manual labor. Therefore, to
maintain physical strength and morale, persons in
shelters ideally should have enough healthful food
to provide well-balanced, adequate meals for many
weeks.
In most American homes there are only enough
ready-to-eat, concentrated foods to last a few days.
Obviously, it would be an important survival ad-
vantage to keep on hand a two-week supply of easily
transportable foods. In any case, occupants of
shelters would be uncertain about when they could
get more food and would have to make hard decisions
about how much to eat each day. (Those persons
who have a fallout meter, such as the homemade
instrument described in Chapter 10, could estimate
when and for how long they could emerge from
shelter to find food. As a result, these persons could
ration their limited foods more effectively.