
Fig. 17.2, the sand in this 26 x 26-inch square
vertical exit was supported by a piece of 3/4-
inch exterior plywood, that should be of the
previously mentioned rot-proof type, pressure
impregnated with wood preservative.
Inthecenterofthis251f2x 251f2-inch plywood
sand-support was an 8-inch-diameter hole cov-
ered withtwo thicknessesofstrongnyloncloth.The double thickness of cloth was firmly at-
tached to the plywood by being folded over four
3/16-inch galvanized steel rods, that were
stapledtothe plywoodwith galvanizedpoultry-
netting staples. (See Figs. 17.2 and 17.3.) The
nylon cloth covering the hole can be easily and
quickly cut with a knife, permitting sand to fall
harmlessly into the shelter room.
I f..-23" CONCRETE R[M --l I
~ 25-[/2" BEMOVABLE SAND - SUPPORT----.:..j
f------ 26" Ex [T -------t
Fig. 17.3. Plan of Vertical Emergency Exit,
Before Filling with Sand.
As shown in Figs. 17.2 and 17.3, the square
26 x 26-inch plywood sand-support rests on a
llf2-inch-wide rim or ledge around the 23 x 23-
inch square hole in the shelter's reinforced
concrete roof slab. After a shelter occupant has
cutoutthe nylon cloth coveringthe hole and all
but about 30 lbs of sand has fallen or been
pushed by his hand down into the shelter room,
he can tilt the plywood sand-support up into a
vertical position, and then turn it 45 degrees.
The26-inch widthofthe sand-supportpermitsit
to be easily lifted down through the 32.5-inch-
long diagonal ofthe 23 x 23-inch square hole in
the shelter's roof slab.
Note the North-pointing arrow on the ply-
wood sand-support shown in Fig. 17.3. Because
the exit of this shelter was not made perfectly
square, the sand-support could be tilted most
easily from its horizontal position into the
vertical position if it was oriented so that its
side marked "N" wasto the north. A similar"N"
arrow on the lower side of this sand-support
enabled a man below it, after the exit's lid was
tied down and before the exit was filled with
sand, to position the sand-support for easy
tilting and removal when the last of the sand
was being cleared from this exit. The sand-
supportshouldbe cutto fit the exitaftertheexit
is completed, because it is difficult to build an
exit exactly to specified dimensions.
The top of the emergency exit should be a
few inches above the earth around it, to prevent
rainwateronthe groundfrom possiblyrunning
in. Securely cover the exit's top with a lid of
lI8-inch galvanized steel having a threaded
plug-hole (cutfrom a steelbarrel) weldedover a
hole cut in the lid's center. Such a lid can be
closely fitted to the top of a concrete exit by
oiling it and pressing it against the concrete
before the concrete begins to set.
Before filling the exit with sand, while
inside the exittiethe liddownoneachofitsfour
sides with nine loops of 3/32-inch nylon cord
repeatedly tightened between four galvanized
steel"V's" welded to the lower side of the lid,
and four" V's" set in the shelter's walls and
roof slab, as indicated in Fig. 17.2. Use pliers to
tighten, stretch, and hold the nylon cord while
makingtheloops. Then afterthe plywood sand-
support is positioned in the bottom of the exit,
the exit can be filled by pouring dry sand
through the plug-hold in the steel lid. Finally,
the plug-holeshould be closed so that it cannot
be opened, and then made waterproof. To make
doubly sure that the lid will not rust, paint it
with a cement paint, and then with whatever
color outdoor paint you want.
