hours of
continuous shelter occupancy huddled on the floor.
(Their shelter room was only 31/2 feet wide and 161/2
feet Iong.) So this family took with them from home
four folding chairs and two pieces of plywood (each
21 inches wide by 6 feet long) tied as part of the load
on top of the family car. Four small wooden boxes
served as food containers during the drive to the
shelter-building site. In the shelter, the boxes were
used to support the ends of two narrow plywood
bunks (Fig. 14.1).
The family's system of sleeping and sitting in
shifts worked reasonably well. There were discom-
forts: the adults found the two plywood bunks too
narrow, and the plywood was so hard that all the
family members used their sleeping bags for padding
rather than for needed warmth on chilly nights. The
father and oldest son, whose turn to sleep wasduring
normal waking hours, had trouble sleeping in such a
small shelter while the lively 4-year-old son was
awake.
Note that in the shelter pictured in Fig. 14.1the
earth walls are covered with plastic from trash bags.
Covering earth walls with plastic or bed sheets makes
for a cleanershelter, with lessearth falling inthe faces
of people who sleep on the floor. Bedsheets on the
walls make a shelter brighter, but are flammable and
a potential fire hazard. The plasticfilm prevented theFig. 14.1. Bunks and folding chairs furnished
this Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. (Note the sus-
pended transistor radio. Reception is good in all
types of expedient shelters tested to date.)
earth walls from drying and crumbling as a result of
the hot, dry desert air pumped through the shelter
during the day.
Benches with overhead wooden bunks are
shown in Fig. 14.2. These were installed in a Small-
Pole Shelter 6 feet wide with a ceiling almost 7 feet
high.
A well-designed expedient shelter should be as
small as practical, with all space used very efficiently.
The builders should make the heights and widths of
benches and bunks as specified in the detailed shelter
drawings, such as those for the S"mall-Pole Shelter
given in Appendix A.3.
Serious difficulties can result from failure to use
specific dimensions that may appear unimportant.
For example, in field tests at Fort Bragg, N.C., 48
Fig. 14.2. Benches with overhead bunks in a
skillfully designed Small-Pole Shelter of Russian
design. Three rural families in a wooded area of
Tennessee built this expedient blast shelter in 48
hours, including the time spent felling trees and
making furnishings.
airborne infantrymen, working only with hand tools,
cut pine trees and built two 24-man Small-Pole
Shelters in less than 24 hours." The men did not
think it necessary to use the specific dimensions when
they made the furnishings. As a result, they built the
benches too high and the overhead bunks too far
below the ceilings. This errorforced the men to sitfor
hours in hunched positions. Even these able-bodied
young men would have developed very sore backs
and would have wanted very much to leave their
shelters if they had been forced to sit in a bent-over
position for days.
Figure 14.2 shows a good example of the
importance of using dimensions which have been
thoroughly field-tested when building essential parts
of a shelter. Note the small air-exhaust opening
above the girl lying on the overhead bunk at one endof the shelter. This opening led to a small, chimney-
like, air-exhaust duct made of boards, with its cross-
sectional area as specified in Russian civil defense
handbooksfor naturalventilationofsmall expedient
shelters. With such a small air-exhaust opening-
only 4 square inches (10 square centimeters) per
person-a fully occupied shelter of this size would
soon become dangerously overheated in warm or
hot weather, even though a good low-pressure
expedient shelter-ventilating pump (a KAP
or a DirectionalFan) were to be used. A much
larger air-exhaust opening is needed. See
Appendix A.3.
BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK AND CHAIR
On the last night of the Utah family's shelter
stay it was clear that the six members'would win the
cash bonusoffered them for their 72-houroccupancy
of the shelter starting immediately after they com-
pleted building it. 