
would be subjected to blast and fire dangers.
Many, whose homes are in the suburbs or ad-
jacenttowns in these metropolitan areas, couldlogically decide not to evacuate, but to build earth-
covered shelters at or very near their homes and to
supply them with life-support essentials. Likewise,
people living even as close as 5 miles from an
isolated probable target may decide to build a
good shelter near their supplies, rather than to
evacuate. This is a good idea, provided that (I) their
homes are far enough away from probable aiming
points to make such shelters practical, and (2)enough
time, space, tools, materials, and supplies are available.
The photo (Fig. 4.4)shows a family with no adult
male that built an expedient shelter that would givefar
betterfallout, blast, and fireprotectionthanalmostany
home. They succeeded, despite the necessityofworking
on cold November-days withsnow flurries. The top two
inches ofearth werefrozen and the next two feetsodry
that most of it had to be loosened with their dull pick.
No memberofthis family had done any serious digging
before, yet they built a shelter that would have given
about 100 times as much protection against fallout
radiation as would a typical small frame house and at
least 25 times as much as atypical home basement.
(Falloutsheltersare designedfor protectionagainst
radiation from fallout particles. Although fallout shel-
ters lack blast doors and other means for keeping out
blast, the better types would prevent their occupants
from being killed by blast effects in extensive areas
where people in houses would have little chance of
surviving. Inthis book,an "expedientshelter"generally
means an expedient fallout shelter.)
Even as simple an earth-covered fallout
shelter as this Door-Covered Trench Shelter, if
built well separatedfrom flammable buildings,
usually would save its occupants' lives in ex-
tensive areas devastated by blast and/or fire.
The area of probable survival in a good earth-
coveredfallout shelterwouldextendfrom where
blastdamage wouldbe lightbutfires likelyto be
numerous, inward toward GZ to where most
homes would be collapsed by blast and/or de-
stroyed by fire. This ring-shaped area of prob-
able survival from blast and/or fire effects of a
1-MT air burst would extend from about 8 miles
from GZ inward to approximately 5.5 miles. Its
area would be about 105 square miles, more
than the 95 square miles in the circular area
with a radius of 5.5 miles centered on GZ and
within which this simple a shelter probably
would be collapsed by the blastoverpressure of
a 1-MT airburst.(Door-CoveredTrenchShelters
and most of the other types of earth-covered
expedient shelters described in this book have
Fig. 4.4. This family completed their Pro-
tection Factor 200 (PF 200) fallout shelter, a
Door-Covered Trench Shelter with 2 feet of
earth on its roof, 34 hours after receiving the
building instructions at their home.
been proven dependable in test explosions con-
ducted by the Defense Nuclear Agency.)
In many areas, this and even better types of
expedient fallout shelters affording considerable blast
protectioncould bebuilt by untrained families, follow-
ing the written, field-tested instructions in this book.
Furthermore (as shown in Appendix 0, Expedient
Blast Shelters) within a fewdays a small but significant
fraction of the population could build expedient blast
shelters complete with expedient blast doors and
providing at least 15-psiblast protection,Chapter 5
Shelter, the Greatest Need
ADEQUATE SHELTER
To improve your chances ofsurviving a nuclear
attack, your primary need would be an adequate
shelter equipped for many days of occupancy. A
shelter that affords good protection against fallout
radiation and weather would be adequate in more
than 95% of the area of the United States. However,
even in almost all areas not endangered by blast and
fire during a massive nuclear attack, the fallout
protection provided by mostexisting buildings would
not be adequate if the winds blew from the wrong
direction during the time of fallout deposition.
To remain in or near cities or other probable
target areas, one would need betterprotection against
blast, fire, and fallout than is provided by most
shelters in buildings. 