-in. FRAME
\
Fig. 3. KAP frame (looking at the back side of
the frame).
1x:in. CENTER BRACE
NAIL HEADS
It the irame is made ot only one thickness oi
board 3/4in. to I in. thick, it will not be sufficiently
heavy to swing back far enough on its free-swinging
return stroke.
NOTE:
ALL WOOD FOR FRAME
IS CUT FROM IX2 in.
EXCEPT I XI in. CENTER
BRACE
b. To make the front side smooth and flat so
that the flaps will close tightly, fill in the spaces as
follows: Cut two pieces of 1 X 2-in. boards long
enough to fillinthe spaceson top of the 36-in. sides of
the frame between the top and bottom horizontaf
boards, and nail these 1i\ler boards in place. Do the
samethingwith a \ Y-. \ -in. board (or a board the srze
of that used for the centerbrace) as a filler board for
the center brace (see Fig. 4).
36in.
t. "Ihe {tame
NOTE THAT THE WIDTHS AND THICK-
NESSES OF ALL FRAME PIECES ARE EXAG-
GERATED IN ALL ILLUSTRAnONS.
4. The pull cord:
(Ist) At least 10 ft of cord; (2nd) strong string;
(3rd) flexible, light wire.
B. Tools-
a. Cut two pieces of I X2-in. boards, each36 in.
long, and two pieces of I X 2-in. boards, each 29 in.
iong; then nail them together(see Fig. 3). Use nails
that do not split the wood, prekrably longenoughto
go through the boards and stick out about l/Zin. on
the otherside. (To nail inthis manner, first put blocks
under the frame so that the nail points will not strike
the floor.) Bend over nail points which go through.
A hammer, saw, wirecutter pliers, screwdriver,
scissors, knife, yardstick, and pencil are desirable.
However, only a strong, sharp knife is essential for
making some models.
5. The flap-stops:
• (Ist) 150 ft of light string; (2nd) 150ft of light,
smooth wire; (3rd) 150ft of very strong thread; (4th)
600 ft of ordinary thread, to provide 4 threads for
each stop-flap.
• (ist) 90 tacks (not thumbtacks); (2nd) 90 small
nails. (Tacks or nails are desirable but not essential,
since the flap-stops can be tied to the frame.)
C. Building a KAP36inches High by29inches Wide
A 36X29-in. KAP ismosteffective ifoperated in
an air-intake or exhaust opening about 40 in. high
and 30 in. wide. (Ifyourshelter might have more than
25 occupants in hot weather, read all these
instructions so you will understand how to build a
larger pump, briefly described in Section VIII.)
~e"l'..\, cutanuna\\\o\\\elramea p\ece0\ \ Y-. \-\n.
lumber 36 in. long, for a center vertical brace. (Ifyou
lack time to make or to find a I X I-in. board, use a
I X 2-in. board.) Figure 3 shows the back side of the
frame: the flap valves will be attached on the front
(the opposite) side.CENTER
VERTICAL BRACE SIDE VIEW
BACKFRONT.
FILLER
BOARD
B
2. The hinges
Ordinary door butt-hinges are
best. So that the pump can swing
past the horizontal position, the
hinges should be screwed onto the
front of the frame. at its top, inthe
positions shown in Fig. 4. (Pick
one of the 29-in. boards and call it
the top.) If you do not have a drill
for drilling a screw hole, you can
make a hole by driving a nail and
then pulling it out. Screw the
screw into the nail hole.
NOTE HINGES ARE ON
THE FAR (= THE FRONT)
SIDE OF FRAME
Fig. 4. Completing the frame.
3. The pivot-wires and flaps
a. Make 9 flap pivot-wires. 