.Chapter 3
Warnings and Communications
IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE WARNING
When Hiroshima and Nagasaki were blasted by
the first nuclear weapons ever to be used in war, very
few of the tens of thousands of Japanese killed or
injured were inside their numerous air raid shelters.
The single-plane attacks caught them by surprise.
People are not saved by havingshelters nearby unless
they receive warning in time to reach their shelters-
and unless they heed that warning.
TYPES OF WARNINGS
Warnings are of two types, strategicand tactical.
• Strategic warning is based on observed enemy
actions that are believed to be preparations for an
attack. For example, we would have strategic
warning if powerful Russian armies were advancing
into western Europe and Soviet leaders were
threatening massive nuclear destruction if the
resisting nations should begin to use tactical nuclear
weapons. With strategic warning beinggiven by news
broadcasts and newspapers over a period of days,
Americans in areas that are probably targeted would
have time to evacuate. Given a day or more of
warning, tens of millions of uscould build or improve
shelters and in other ways improve our chances of
surviving the feared attack. By doing so, we also
would help decrease the risk of attack.
• Tactical warning of a nuclear attack on the
United States would be received by our highest
officials a few minutes after missiles or other nuclear
weapons had been launched against our country.
Radar, satellites, and other sophisticated means of
detection would begin to feed information into our
military warning systems almost at once. This raw
information would have to be evaluated, ami top-
level·decisions would have to be made. Then attack
warnings would have to be transmitted down to com-
munities all over America.
Tactical warning (attack warning) of an out-of-
the-blue, Pearl-Harbor-type attack would be less
likely to be received by the average American than
would an attack warning given after recognized
strategic warning. However, the short time (only 15to
40 minutes) that would elapse between missile launch-
ings and the resultant first explosions on targets in the
United States would make it difficult for even an
excellent warning system to alert the majority of
Americans in time for them to reach the best available
nearby shelter.
Strengths and weaknesses of the present official
warning system are summarized in the following two
sections. Then the life-saving warnings that the first
nuclear explosions would give, especially to informed
people, are described.
OFFICIAL WARNING SYSTEM
The U.S. official warning system is designed to
givecivilians timely warning by means of siren signals
and radio and television announcements. The National
Warning System (NAWAS) is a wire-line network
which is to provide attack information to official
warning points nationwide. NA WAS is not pro-
tected against electromagnetic pulse (EMP)
effects from nuclear explosions. When the
information is received at warning points by the
officials who are responsible, they will sound local
sirens and initiate radio and TV emergency broad-
casts - if power has not failed. Officials at NAWAS
warning points include many local civil defense
directors. NAWAS receives information from ourconstantly improving military warning and commu-
nications systems.
SIREN WARNINGS
The Attack Warning Signal is a wavering,
wailing sound on the sirens lasting three to five
minutes, or a series of short blasts on whistles or
horns. After a brief pause, it is repeated. This signal
means only one thing: take protective action-go
promptly to the best available shelter. Do not try to
telephone for information; get information from a
radio broadcast after you reach shelter. It is Federal
policy that the Attack Warning Signal will not be
sounded unless an enemy attack on the United States
has been detected. However, since local authorities
may not follow this policy, the reader is advised to
check the plans in his community before a crisis
arrscs.
The following limitations of attack warnings
given by sirens and broadcasting stations should be
recognized:
• Only a relatively small fraction of urban
Americans could hear the sirens in the present city
systems. especially if most urban citizens had
evacuated during a crisis.
• Except in a crisis threatening the outbreak of
nuclear war at any moment. most people who would
hear the attack warning signal either would not
recognize it or would not believe it was a warning of
actual attack.
