 of about l-pint
size, cooking oil, cotton string for
wicks(seeChapter II, Light), kitchen
matches, and a moisture-proof jar
for storing matches.
Category 7. Clothing: Cold-weatherboots, over-
shoes, and warm outdoor cloth-
ing (even in summer, since after
an attack these would be unobtain-
able), raincoats and ponchos. Wear
work clothes and work shoes.
Category 8. Sleeping Gear: A compact sleeping
bag or two blankets per person.
Category 9. Food: Food for babies (including
milk powder, cooking oil, and
sugar) has the highest priority.
Compact foods that require no
cooking are preferred. Include at
least one pound of salt, available
vitamins, a can and bottle opener,
a knife, and 2 cooking pots with
lids (4-qt size preferred). For each
person:onecup, bowl,andlarge
spoon. Also, a bucket stove, or
minimum materials for making a
bucketstove:ametalbucket,10al\-
wire coat hangers, a nail, and a cold
chisel orscrewdriver(seeChapter9,
. Food).
Category 10. Sanitation Items: Plastic film or
plastic bags in which to collect and
contain excrement; a bucket or
. plastic container for urine; toilet
paper, tampons, diapers, and soap.
Category 11. Medical Items: Aspirin, a first-aid
kit, all available antibiotics and
disinfectants, special prescription
medicines (if essential to a member
of the family), potassium iodide (for
protection against radioactive io-
dine, see Chapter 13), spare eye-
glasses, and contact lenses.
Category 12. Miscellaneous: Two square yards
of mosquito netting or insect screen
with which to screen the shelter
openings if insects are a problem,
insect repellents, a favorite book or
two.
B. SOME USEFUL ITEMS (To take ifcar space is
available):
1. Additional tools.
2. A tent, a small camp stove, and some
additional kitchen utensils.Fig. 4.3. Six members of a Utah family arriving at a rural shelter-building site 64 miles from their
urban home.
EVACUATING BY CAR
The small car shown in Fig. 4.3 was skillfully
loaded for a safe evacuation trip. To make room for
supplies, the back seat was left at home. The load
on top of the car included blankets, a small rug, and
a small tent-all made of springy materials which
kept the load from becomingcompacted and working
loose under the 114-inch nylon ropes tightened
around it.The two loop-ended ropes went over the load
and around the top of the car, passing over the tops of
the closed doors.
USING MUSCLE POWER
Hazards of evacuation would include highways
blocked by wrecks and stalled vehicles. Ifleadership
and know-how were provided, the muscle power
of people usually could quickly clear a highway.
During a major Chineseevacuation before advancing
Japanese armies in World War II, I observed
Chinese, using only muscle power, quickly clear
a mountain road of wrecks and other obstructions.
Americans can do the same, if someone convinces
them that they can do it, as proved by a wintertime
episode on Monarch Pass over the Continental
Divide in Colorado. At least 100 vehicles were held
up after a large wrecking truck overturned on the
icy highway. The patrolmen were doing nothinguntil
I told them how the Chinese handled sucha situation.
The patrolmen then called for volunteers from
among the delayed motorists to lift the overturned
truck back onto its wheels. In less than 15minutes,
about 50 people had combined their muscle power
and opened Monarch Pass to traffic.
Citizens should take direct action to keep traffic
moving during a crisis evacuation.
MAKING AN EXPEDIENT OR
PERMANENT SHELTER INSTEAD OF
EVACUATING
Millions of Americans have homes within very
largeurban-industrialareas, probablynotallof which
would be subjected to blast and fire dangers.
Many, whose homes are in the suburbs or ad-
jacenttowns in these metropolitan areas, couldlogically decide not to evacuate, but to build earth-
covered shelters at or very near their homes and to
supply them with life-support essentials. Likewise,
people living even as close as 5 miles from an
isolated probable target may decide to build a
good shelter near their supplies, rather than to
evacuate. 