 ofthis exithousingletenough
daylight into the exit shaft, that is painted
white, to permit a person on the shelter floor
below to read, even for several minutes after
sunset. See:Fig. FA.
* A way to observe what is going on all
aroundtheshelter,withouthavingtogooutside,
and with lessenedexposuretofallout radiation.
*Quickinstallationpost-attack, afterfallout
decays sufficiently. In an installation test, dirt
was dug away to expose the upper 12 inches of
the emergencyexitshaft. Theninjust8 minutes
the author and a boy carried the 5 parts of this
exit housing 80 feet, positioned its four walls
around the already exposed upper 12 inches of
the reinforced concrete emergency exit, nailed
its walls together, and placed its adjustable top
in the tilted position pictured in Fig. F.1.
BUILDING AND USING AN ENTRYWAY
COVER THAT PROVIDES A LARGE,
PROTECTED VENTILATION OPENING
Build a shelter entryway cover that keeps
out rain, snow, and the bigger dust and fallout
particles while providing a large, protected
ventilationopeningboth for natural ventilation
and for easy forced ventilation by a KAP when
needed. Foran exampleofOne type ofentryway
cover, see Fig. F.5. This photo shows a 4-piece
cover, that two men in a little less than 5
minutes carried out ofthis shelter and installed
over the 4 x 6-foot opening above the shelter's
opened stairway doors.
Fig. F.5. A Quickly Installable, 4-Piece
Entryway Cover That Provides Easy Access
and a Large, Protected Ventilation Opening.
This cover is made of 4 pieces of 1/4-inch
chipboard, each5feet wide, and shortlengths of
nailed-on 1 x2-inch boards. These 4 pieces can
be tied quickly with their attached nylon cords
to innerparts of thetwo2x 6-foot steelentryway
doors, which are pictured in their opened, up-
right positions.
Thelowermostofthe4chipboard pieceshas
a groove near each end. The grooves are each
made of 2 nailed-on lengths of 1 x 2 lumber
spaced apart to fit the lower ends of the doors
and hold them in their upright positions 4 feet
apart. Theupperedge ofthislowermostpieceis
8 inches below the lower raised corners of the
doors, sothatan 8x 48-inchventilation opening
is assured when the lower of the two large
coveringpieces(picturedbeingheldopen) rests
on the doors. (This step-over piece of chipboard
illustratesa waytoreduce the quantityoflarger
fallout particles that will be blown into many
types of shelters, because most sandlike parti-
cles andcoarsedust areblown alongclosetothe
ground. They are not blown upward and over a
vertical obstruction by most winds. Ifan entry-
way has an inner, ordinarydoorway, evenmore
fallout particles can be kept out of the shelter
room if an 18 x 18-inch ventilationhole. i.s.e.ut..-L",-OTHER ENTRYWAY COVERS TO PROVIDE
LARGE PROTECTED OPENINGS FOR
NATURALANDKAPVENTILATION
The owner of a permanent shelter with an
emergencyexitmaybeabletoimprovisecover-
ings over its entry and exit after fallout decays
sufficientlytopermitworkoutdoors- provided
that he understands natural ventilation and
low-pressure forced ventilation requirements,
andhastheboards,nails,piecesofchipboardor
plywoodorcanvas,tools,etc. needed. Butifyou
owna permanentshelteryourpre-crisisprepara- .
tions surelyshouldinclude makingandstoring
ready-to-install entryway and exit coverings of
whatever designs you decide will best meet
your anticipated needs for high-protection-
factorsleepingandlivingquartersduringweeks
or months following a nuclear attack.
The most practical hinge that the author
has devised is illustrated by the drawing. This
flexible hinge is much less likely to be broken
than are conventional hinges, and makes it
easier to build the two large covering pieces to
fit over the opened doors. Note that the upper
edge of the lower large piece goes under the
rainproofing, 6-inch-wide rubber flap, which is
nailed only along the lower edge of the upper
large covering piece. 