INESE II
SHELTER
6 ft 6 in.
OUTSIDE 2 POLES
LARGER DIA AND
LOG·CABIN NOTCHED
_ 6 ft 6 in-, ~
STEP (1 ft-4 in.;
2Y, in. DIAl
SPACED - 1 ft
APART
SPACER POLE
(WIRED TO
ADJACENT POLE)
TOP VIEW
/1'
48 in. COVER
-T
WIRE POSTS
TOGETHER,
TOP AND
BOTTOM
TRENCH
64 in. DEEP
.,'
"
I"
7 ft 6 in. _~~
POLYETHYLENE (_--:--.__-==~ 4 "hI)
-'--~------... --- - -~~-~ -
I
I ,
\!I
',I
iii -
LIMBS
OR BRUSH.
, ,.
"
DIG SLOTS IN SIDE
OF TRENCH FOR
ENDS OF HORIZON-
TAL POLES
SHALLOW DITCH
~ 5ft6in. ~_I
~~~AYTRENCH ~
VIEW LOOKING INTO SHELTER FROM A-A
Fig. D.11. Lower part of a vertical triangular entry, showing its connection to the horizontal part of
the shelter entry.Fig. D.12. Completed frame of Chinese "Man" Sheltershowing its two ORNL-designed entryways
(one at each end) and triangular blast doors made of poles. Before covering the triangular vertical entries with
earth, tree branches were placed vertically over the sides; the branches then were covered with bedsheets.
Horizontal branches, also covered with bedsheets, were laid over the rest of the shelter frame. After being
covered with earth, this shelter was subjected to I-kiloton blast effects. Multiple earth arching over and around
this yielding structure prevented both the small poles and the bedsheets from being damaged at 20 psi.
shown in Fig. D.II.) The41h-foot horizontal poles (1)
were kept level by the short spacer-poles (3) that were
wired or nailed in place.
Each pair of vertical posts(2) was securely wired
together at top and bottom. The two pairs were held
apart at top and bottom by two horizontal brace-
poles tcenailed in place to frame the rectangular
30-X30-inch crawlway "doorway" between the
vertical entry and the horizontal entry. Only the
upper pole (4) of these two 30-inch-long horizontal
brace-poles is shown.
The two pairs of vertical posts (2) were
positioned so that they pressed against two 7
1h-foot
horizontal poles (5); only the uppermost is shown.
These in turn pressed against the outermost two poles
(6) of the horizontal entry and against the earth in
two slot-trenches dug in the sidewalls of the
excavation. These two 71/2-foot poles (5) should be at
least 6 inches in diameter.
Additional details of the lower section of this
vertical triangular entry are given in Fig. 0.11. If
horizontal poles considerably larger in diameter than
those illustrated are used, fewer poles are required
and strength is increased. However, the space inside
the entry is decreased unless the larger-diameter
horizontal poles that form the "V" are made longer
than 41/2 feet.
As shown on the left in Fig. 0.10, a small,
vertical pole (7) was placed in the small "V" between
the outer ends of the horizontal poles that form the
lower section of the vertical entry. After this photo
was taken, a second small, vertical pole was
positioned in the adjacent large "V", inside the entry.
These two poles (7) were then tightly wired together
so as to make a strong, somewhat yielding, outer-
corner connection of the horizontal poles (I)-in the
same way that the tops of the side-wall poles ofthe
Chinese "Man" Shelter are bound together.
The upper section of the vertical part of this
entry (the section above the tops of the two pairs of
vertical posts shown in Fig. 0.10 and Fig. 0.11) is
made by overlapping the ends ofits nearly horizontal
poles (Fig. 0.12). These poles [marked with a (1) in
Fig. 0.10] were each 4 feet 6 inches long and varied
uniformly in diameter from about 21/2 inches just
above the two pairs of wired-together posts, to 4-inch
diameters just below the triangular door frame of
poles. 