 lives.
Especially rewarding have been the thanks of
readers - particularlymotherswith smallchil-
dren - for having giventhemhopeofsurviving
a nuclear war. Rekindled, realistic hope has
caused some readers to work to improve their
andtheirfamilies' chancesof surviving,ranging
from making preparations to evacuate high
risk areas during an all too possible worsening
crisis,to buildingandstockingpermanentshel-
ters.
Because I wrote the original Nuclear War
Survival Skills while working at Oak Ridge
NationalLaboratoryattheAmericantaxpayers'expense, I have no proprietory interesteitherin
the original 1979 Government edition or in any
of the privately printed reproductions. I have
gottennothingbutsatisfactionfrom the reported
sales of over 400,000 copies privately printed
and sold between 1979 and 1987. Nor will I
receive any monetaryreward inthe future from
my effortsto give bettersurvival instructionsto
people who want to improve their chances of
surviving a nuclear attack.
AVAILABILITY
None of the material that appeared in the
original Oak Ridge National Laboratory un-
copyrighted 1979 edition can be covered by a
legitimate copyright; it can be reproduced by
anyone, without receiving permission. Much
new material, which I have written since my
retirement in 1979 from Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, has been added, and is printed in a
different type. To assure that this new material
also can be made widely available to the public
at low cost, without getting permission from or
paying anyone, I have copyrighted my new
material in the unusual way specified by this
1987 edition's copyright notice.
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS
Work to persuade the President, your Con-
gressmen, your Senators, and other leaders to
supportimprovednuclearwarsurvivalprepara-
tions, starting with increased funding for war-
related civil defense. Urge them to approve and
fund the early deployment of truly defensive
weaponsthattests alreadyhave provencapable
of destroyingsomewarheadsinflight. (Attempts
todevelop perfectdefenses postpone orprevent
the attainment of improved defenses.)
Obtain and study the best survival instruc-
tions available long before a crisis occurs.
Better yet, also make preparations, such as the
onesdescribedinthis book,toincreaseyourand
your family's chances of surviving.
During a crisis threatening nuclear attack,
presentuncertaintiesregardingthedistribution
of reliable survival information seem likely to
continue. Thoroughly field-tested survival in-
structions are not likely to be available to most
Americans..Furthermore, even a highly intelli-
gent citizen, if given excellent instructions
during a crisis, would not have time to learn
basic facts about nuclear dangers and the rea-
sonsfor various survivalpreparations. Without
this understanding, no one can do his best at
following any type of survival instructions.
Byfollowing the instructions inthis book, you and
your family can increase the odds favoring your
survival. If such instructions were made widely avail-
able from official sources, and if our Government
urged all Americansto follow them duringa worsening
crisis lasting atleast several days, additional millions
would survive an attack. And the danger of an attack,
even the threat of an attack, could be decreased if an
enemy nation knew that wehad significantly improved
our defenses in this way.Chapter 1
The Dangers from Nuclear Weapons: Myths and Facts
An all-out nuclear war between Russia and the
United States would be the worst catastrophe in
history, a tragedy so huge it is difficult to compre-
hend. Even so, it would be farfrom the end of human
life on earth. The dangers from nuclearweapons have
been distorted and exaggerated, for varied reasons.
These exaggerations have become demoralizing
myths. believed by millions, of Americans.
While working with hundreds of Americans
building expedient shelters and life-support equip-
ment. I have found that many people at first see no
sense in talking about details of survivalskills. Those
who hold exaggerated beliefs about the dangers from
nuclear weapons must first beconvinced that nuclear
war would not inevitably be the end of them and
everything worthwhile. Only after they have begun to
question the truth of these myths do they become
interested, under normal peacetime conditions, in
acquiring nuclear war survival skills. Therefore,
before giving detailed instructions for making and
using survival equipment, we will examine the most
harmful of the myths about nuclear war dangers,
along with some of the grim facts.
