18
miles upwind from such a 20-MT explosion,
with heavyfallout, capable ofcausingfatalities
within days to weeks, extending downwind for
several hundred miles.
A l-MTsurfaceburst,Fig. 4.1,wouldproduce
a stabilized fallout cloud unlikely to result in
fallout being deposited in the upwind or cross-
wind directions from GZ beyondthe rangeofthe
explosion's home-destroying blast effects.
Clearly, the risk of your being endangered by
very heavy fallout if you remain 6 miles from
GZ of a 1-MT surface burst, and happen to be
upwind or crosswind from GZ, is less than the
risk you would have run a decade ago ifyou had
stayed 18 miles upwind or crosswind from the
same target, which had been destroyed by a 20-
MT surface or near-surface burst.HIGHEST-RISK AND HIGH-RISK AREAS
Highest-riskareas are thosein which build-
ings are likely to be destroyed by blast and/or
fire, and/or where a person in the open for the
first two weeks after fallout deposition would
receive a total radiation dose of 10,000 R or
more. The largest highest-risk areas would be
those within our five Minuteman missile fields,
within a few miles all around them, and for up to
about 150 miles downwind. Thesehuge highest-
risk areas are indicated by five of the largest
black fallout patterns on Fig. 4.2.
Fig. 4.2 is an oudated, computer-drawn
fallout map based on a multi-megaton attack
considered credible 10 years ago. (An updated,
unclassified fallout map of the United States,
showingradiationdoses to persons in the open,
is not available.) This outdated attack included
113 surfaceburstsof20 megatons each on urban
and industrial targets, an unlikely assumption
similar to those used in making some official
civil defense risk-area maps that assumed sur-
face burstson all targets nationwide. Employing
all surface bursts makes little sense to the
military, because air burstingthe sameweapons
would destroy most military installations, as
well as factories and other urban and industrial
assets, over approximately twice as large an
area.
As will be explained later, to survive in such
areas people would have to stay inside very good
shelters for several weeks, or, after two weeks or more,
leave very good shelters and drive in a few hours to an
area relatively free of fallout dangers. A "very good"
fallout shelter is one that reduces the radiation dose
received by its occupants to less than 1/200th of the
dose they would have received outdoors during the
same period. If the two-week dose outdoors were
20,000 R, such a shelter with a protection factor of 200
(PF200)would prevent each occupant from receiving a
dose greater than 100 R - not enough to incapacitate.
Even a completely belowground home basement,
unless greatly improved as described in Chapter 5.
would give entirely inadequate protection.
High-risk fallout areas are those where the two-
week dose outdoors is between 5,000 and 10,000 R. In
such areas. good fallout shelters would be essential.
supplied at least with adequate waterand baby food for
two weeks. Furthermore. survivors would have to
remain inside shelters for most of each day for several
additional weeks.
The radiation dangers in the shaded areas of the
map are shown decreasing as the distances from the
explosions increase. This generally isthe case, although
sometimes rain or snow carries radioactive particles to
the ground. producing "rainouts" of exceptionally
heavv fallout farther downwind. Furthermore, this
computer-drawn map made at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory does not indicate the very dangerous
29
fallout near the isolated surface bursts. Although the
most dangerous fallout would be carried by high-
altitude winds that usually blow from westto east, such
simplified fallout patterns as those shown should be
used only as rough guides to help improve chances of
evacuating a probable blast area or very heavy fallout
area and going to a less dangerous area. Wind
directions are undependable; an enemy's targeting can
be unexpected; weapons can miss. A prudent citizen.
no matter where he is,should try to build a shelter that
gives excellent protection against fallout radiation.
A major disadvantage of all types of risk-area
maps is the fact that poorly informed people often
misinterpret them and conclude that ifthey are outside
a mapped risk area, they are relatively safe from blast,
fire, and even deadly fallout dangers.
