 out a batch of gypsum that almost covers the
bottom ofthe can with a single layer.
b. Cut a piece of aluminum foil about 8 in. x 8 in. square, and fold up its
edges to form a bowl-like container in which to heat one batch of gypsum
pieces.
Measure out 10or 12such batches, and puteach batch in its aluminum foil
"bowl."
c.
1.
2.
3.
4.
S.
VI. Useful but not Essential Materials
--Which Could be Obtained Before a Crisis--
VII. Tools Needed
Anairtight container (such as a large peanut butter jar) with a mouth at least 4
inches wide, inwhich to keep a KFM, along with some drying agent, when it is
not being used. Keeping a KFM very dry greatly extends the time during
which the drying agent inside the KFM remains effective.
Commercial anhydrite with a color indicator, such as the drying agent Drierite.
This granular form of anhydrite remains light blue as long as it iseffectiveas a
dryingagent; itturns pink when it becomes ineffective. Oruse silicagel with
color indicator, that is dark blue when effective and that turns light
pink when it becomes ineffective. Heating in a hot oven or in a can
over a fire reactivates them as drying agents and restores their blue
color. Obtainable from laboratory supply sources. Use enough to
cover the bottom of the KFM's can no more than 1/2 inch deep.
Four square feet of aluminum foil, to make a moisture-proof cover for the
dry-bucket.
3.
2.
1.I
('t)
C)
a..
I
('t)
C)
a.Since anhydrite absorbs water from the air very rapidly, quickly put it in a dry
airtight container while it is still quite hot. AMason jar is excellent.
To place anhydrite in a KFM, drop in the pieces one by one, being careful not
to hit the leaves or the stop-threads. The pieces should almost cover the
bottom of the can, with no piece on top of other pieces.
To remove anhydrite from a KFM, use a pair of scissors or tweezers as
forceps, holding them in a vertical position and not touching the leaves.
IX. Make the Ionization Chamberof the KFM
(ToAvoidMistakes and Save Time,
Read AllofThis Section ALOUDBefore Beginning Work.)
Remove the paper label (ifany) from an ordinary 8-ounce can from which the
top has been smoothly cut. Wash the can with soap and water and dry it. (An
8-ounce can has an inside diameter ofabout 2-9/16inches and an inside height
ofabout2-7/8 inches.)
Skipto step 3if an 8-ounce can is available. If an 8-ounce can is not available,
reduce the height of any other can having an inside diameter of about 2-9/16
inches (such as most soup cans, most pop cans, or most beer cans). To cut off
the top part ofa can, first measure and mark the line on which to cut. Then to
keep from bending the can while cutting, wrap newspaper tightly around a
stick or a round wooden tool handle, so that the wood is covered with 20 to 30
thicknesses of paper and the diameter (ideally) is only slightly less than the
diameterofthe can.
One person should hold the can over the paper-covered stick while a second
person cuts the can little by little along the marked cutting line. If leather
gloves are available, wear them. Tocut the can off smoothly, use a file, or use
a hacksaw drawn backwards along the cutting line. Or cut the can with a
.sharp, short blade of a pocketknife by: (1) repeatedly stabbing downward
vertically through the can into the paper, and (2)repeatedly making a cut about
1/4 inch long by moving the knife into a sloping position, while keeping its
point still pressed into the papercovering the stick.
Next, smooth the cut edge, and cover it with small pieces of freezer tape or
otherflexible tape.
3. Cut out the PAPER PATTERN TO WRAP AROUND KFM CAN. (Cut
one pattern out of Pattern Page A.) GIue (ortape) this pattern to the can,
starting with one of the two short sides of the pattern. Secure this starting
short side directly over the side seam of the can. 