elterfurnishings likethose
described inthischapterare provided. Foreach
additional occupant, increase this shelter's
lengthby2feet. To increase room size, increase
length and not width. This retains maximum
roof strength at minimum cost.
Note in Figs. 17.1 and 17.2 the 12-inch-thick
concrete wall between the landing at the foot of
the stairs and the end ofthe shelterroom. Only a
very small fraction of the radiation coming
through theouterdoors anddown the stairs will
make the 90 degree turn through the inner door,
and mostofthis radiation will not strike shelter
occupants if they place containers filled with
water and other shielding material against the
door.
Also note the homemakeable, low cost
Double-Action PistonPump andfilter, shownin
Fig. 17.1, that even in a heat wave will supply
adequate air through the 5-inch-diameter air-
intake pipe - all described in Appendix E.
Few survival-minded Americans, before a
recognized international crisis arises, either
canafford orbelievethattheycanafford tobuild
a permanent family fallout shelter costing
around $10,000 in 1987. A small reinforced con-
crete, below-groundshelterofthe type specified
in official Federal Emergency Management
Agency pamphlets costs about $100 per square
foot of floor space, if built by a contractor in a
typical suburban area. Those with the needed
skills and time can save about half of this cost
bydoingtheirownwork. Also; atmany building
siteswheregravitydrainageofthe earth around
a shelter'swalls canbe assured and hydrostatic
earthpressure againstthewallsthus prevented,
no steelreinforcement inthe pouredconcrete or
concreteblockwallsisneeded - unless required
by the local building code.
Caution: Steel reinforcement in the walls
andfloor is needed in some clay soils thatswell
when wet and exert sufficient inward and up-
ward pressure to crack unreinforced walls and
floor slabs. Consult local builders who have
learned from experience whetherwall andfloor
reinforcementisneeded in the type ofsoil where
you plan to build. If needed, a grid of 112-inch
rebars, spaced at 12inches, usually is adequate.
To save money on steel reinforcement, check
prices in salvage yards for used rebars and
substitutereinIQrcin5materials suchas junked
cable and small pipes.
How to safely pour a shelter's concrete roof
slab without using a contractor's usual forms
and equipment is indicated by Figs. 17.1 and
17.2. These drawings show 8-ft.-Iong sheets of
3/4-inch plywood supported at their ends on
shelter walls 7 feet-6 inches apart. Preparatory
to pouring the concrete, the plywood sheets
should be supported along the centerline of the
shelter by 4"x4"s and other lumber, which can
be used laterto buildseats andoverhead bunks.
Plywoodleftontheceilingreducescondensation
and heating problems in cold weather, but in-
creases the volume of outdoor air that must be
pumped through the shelter to maintain toler-
able temperatures when it is occupied in hot
weather. This was clearly demonstrated in the
summer of 1963 when the author used SIMOeS
(simulated occupants that produce heat and
watervaporlike people)to determinethe habita-
bility of a six-roomlet below ground group
shelter, with a reinforced concrete roof that had
been built in this manner by six New Jersey
farm families. They had left ordinary 3/4-inch
exterior plywood on the ceiling. Because the
hollowconcretewall-blocks andthe welldrained
gravel under the floor also kept heat from
escapingintothe surroundingsoil, and because
only natural ventilation was provided, the
temperature/humidity became dangerously
high within a few hours.
Insulating a shelter's walls and ceiling can
be disadvantageous, because insulation makes
unavailablethe "heatsink" ofthe shelter andits
surrounding earth. In hot weather insulation
reduces the time during which ventilation can
be stopped or restricted without disastrously
overheating the occupants.
Today, for such a shelter it would be better
to use pressure-treated, rot-proof plywood and
lumber, approved by leading building codes.
Forinformation,writetotheAmericanPlywood
Association,P.O. 