 lower earth walls can be squeezed in by
blast pressure. Therefore, it is not recommended if
sufficient materials are available for building a well-
shored, covered-trench shelter. It is described here
primarily to help the reader understand the construc-
tion of similarly designed entryways, outlined later in
this appendix. The room and the horizontal entryway
of the model tested were made of 61/2-foot poles
averaging only 3 inches in diameter. It had two
vertical, triangular entries of ORNL design. Each
was protected by an expedient triangular blast door
made of poles. In Fig. 0.9, note the two small(Most homes would be severelydamaged by the 3-psi
blast effects from a I-megaton or largerweapon. This
damage would result one mile closer to ground zero
of a I-megaton surface burst than the distance at
which the unshored earth walls of some shelters
would be collapsed. For a 20-megaton surface burst,
the corresponding reduction in distance would be
about 2.7 miles.)
• Build sufficiently long and strong entryways.
Blast shelters need longer horizontal entryways,
taller vertical entryways, and thickerearth cover than
do most fallout shelters; these are needed primarily
for increased protection against high levels of initial
nuclear radiation. The entryways of the Small-Pole
Shelter described in Appendix A.3. (with the
improvements for increased blast protection outlined
in the following section of this appendix) afford
protection against both blast and radiation up to the
50-psi overpressure range. However, these entryways
require straight poles 14 feet long; these may be
difficult to find or transport.
In contrast, both the horizontal and the vertical
parts of the triangular entry pictured in Figs. D.10,
0.11, and 0.12 require only small-diameter, short
poles. Triangular entries of this type were un-
damaged by I-kiloton blast effects at the 20-psi
overpressure range" and by0.2-kiloton blast effects at
50 psi. This type of entry and its blast door (also
triangular and made of short poles) can be used with
a wide variety of expedient blast shelters and should
withstand megaton blast effects at 25 psi. Therefore,
their construction isdescribed in considerable detail.
• The horizontal part of a triangular entry: If
the Chinese "Man"Sheltershown in Fig. 0.9 ismade
without excavating the unshored lower trench that
forms its earth seats, it will serve as a horizontal,
shored crawlway-entry affording blast protection up
to at least the 25-psi overpressure range. Two
horizontal entries, one at each end of the shelter,
should be provided. Each entry should be 10 feet
long. This length is needed to reduce the amount of
initial nuclear radiation reaching the blast shelter
room while assuring adequate through-ventilation.
The outer part of such a horizontal entry is pictured
in the background of Fig. 0.10.
• The vertical part of a triangular entry: The
lower section of the vertical part is made in a similar
manner to the horizontal shelter shown in Fig. 0.9.
Figure 0.10 shows 41/2-foot horizontal poles (I)
forming a "V", with one end of each pole laid on top
of the adjacent lower pole. The other ends of these
poles (I) are pressed against the two pairs of vertical
posts (2). (After this photo was taken, the tops of
these two pairs of vertical posts were sawed off as
Fig. 0.10. Uncompleted lower section of a vertical triangular entry.ORNL-DWG 78·14675
4" AND 5" DIA
SPACER
BLOCKS
OF 8-12 in.
LONG
POLES
CONSTRUCTION OF THE
PART OF THE VERTICAL
ENTRY OPPOSITE THE
CRAWLWAY OPENING
5·ft-LONG
HORIZONTAL
ENTRYWAY
OF CHINESE II
SHELTER
6 ft 6 in.
OUTSIDE 2 POLES
LARGER DIA AND
LOG·CABIN NOTCHED
_ 6 ft 6 in-, ~
STEP (1 ft-4 in.;
2Y, in. DIAl
SPACED - 1 ft
APART
SPACER POLE
(WIRED TO
ADJACENT POLE)
TOP VIEW
/1'
48 in. 