, 2 drops of a
saturated solution of potassium iodide each 24 hours.
Potassium iodide has a painfully bad taste, so
badthata singlecrystalor 1dropofthe saturated
solution in a small child's mouth would make
him cry. (A small child would be screaming in
pain before he could eat enough granular or
crystalline KI to make him sick. Some KI
tablets are coated and tasteless.) Since many
persons willnot takea bad-tastingmedication,especially
ifno short-term health hazardsare likely to resultfrom
not taking it, the following two methods of taking a
saturated solution are recommended:
* Put 4drops of the solution into a glass of milk or
other beverage, stir, and drink quickly. Then drink
some ofthe beverage with nothingadded. Ifonly water
is available, use it in the same manner.
* If bread isavailable, place 4drops of the solution
on a small piece of it; dampen and mold it into a firm
ball the size of a large pea, about Ys inch in diameter.
There is almost no taste if this "pill" is swallowed
quickly with water. (Ifthe pill iscoated with margarine,
there is no taste.)
Asstated before, 4drops of the saturated solution
provide a dose approximately equal to 130 mg of
potassium iodide.
• Preparing potassium iodide tablets
to give to infants and small children.
The official FDA instructions for using KI
tablets state that one half of a l30-mg tablet,
"first crushed", should be given every 24 hours
to "babies under one year of age", and that a
whole tablet should be crushed "for small
children."
Putting even a small fraction of a crushed
or pulverized potassium iodide tablet on one's
tongueis a startlingexperience,with a burning
sensation.A slightlyburntsensationcontinues
for hours. Therefore, a mother is advised to
makethisexperimentwhereherchildrencannot
see her.
To eliminate the painfully bad taste of a
crushed or pulverized KI tablet, first pulverize
it thoroughly. Next stir it for a minute into at
least 2 ounces of milk, orange juice, or cold
drink, to make sure that the KI (a salt) is
completely dissolved. Then the taste is not
objectionable.Ifonlywateris available, stirthe
pulverized tablet into more than 2 ounces of
water.
KI is a corrosive salt, more injurious than
aspirin to tissue with which it is in direct
contact. Some doctors advise taking KI tablets
after meals, except when so doing would delay
takingtheinitialdose duringanemergency. All
recognize that taking a dilute solution of KI is
easieronthe stomachthan takingthe samedose
in tablet form. This may be a consequential
consideration when taking KI for weeks during
a prolonged nuclear war emergency.
• WARNINGS
* Elemental(free) iodineispoisonous,except
in the very small amounts in water disinfected
with iodine tablets or a few drops of tincture of
iodine. Furthermore, elemental iodine supplied
by iodine tablets and released by tincture of
iodine dropped into water is not effective as a
blocking agent to prevent thyroid damage. If
you do not have any potassium iodide, DO NOT
TAKE IODINE TABLETS OR TINCTURE OF
IODINE.
* DO NOT MAKE A FUTILE, HARMFUL
ATTEMPT TO EAT ENOUGH IODIZED SALT
TO RESULTIN THYROID BLOCKING. Iodized
salt contains potassium iodide, but in such a
low concentration that it is impossible to eat
enough iodized salt to be helpful as a blocking
agent.
OTHER WAYS TO PREVENT
THYROID DAMAGE
Besides the prophylactic use of potassium
iodide, the following are ways to prevent or
reducethyroiddamage underpeacetime orwar-
time conditions:
* Do not drink or otherwise use fresh milk
produced by cows that have consumed feed or116
water consequentially contaminated with fall-
outorotherradioactive material resultingfrom
a peacetimeaccidentorfrom nuclearexplosions
in a war.
* As a general rule, do not eat fresh vege-
tables until advised it is safe to do so. 