, the temperature-humidity conditions soon
can become unbearable.
Adequate natural ventilation for belowground
shelters is more difficult. Even if there isa light breeze,
not much air willmakea right-angleturnandgo downa
vertical entry, make another right-angle turn, and then
flow througha trench or othershelterpartially obscured
by people and supplies.
In cool weather, occupants' body heat will warm
the shelter air and make it lighter than the outdoor air.
Ifa chimney-like opening or vent-duct isprovided in the
ceiling, the warmed, lighterairwillflow upward and out
of the shelter, provided an adequate air-intake vent is
open near the floor. An Eskimo igloo is an excellent
example of how very small ventilation openings, skill-
fully located in the ceiling and at floor level, make it
possible in cold weather for chimney-type natural
ventilationto supplythe Icfm per person ofoutdoorair
needed to prevent exhaled carbon dioxide from be-
coming dangerously concentrated.
In warm weather, chimney-type natural ventila-
tion usually is inadequate for most high-protection-
factor shelters that are fully occupied for days. And in
hot weather, when as much as 40 cfm per occupant is
required, body-warmed shelterairisno lighterthan the
outdoor air. Chimney-type ventilation fails completely
under these conditions.54
SHELTER VENTILATION
WITHOUT FILTERS
Numerous tests have shown that the hazards from
fallout particles carried into shelters by unfiltered
ventilatingair are minorcompared to the dangersfrom
inadequate ventilation. A 1962summary of the official
standards for ventilating systems of fallout shelters
stated: "Air filters are not essential for small (family
size)shelters ... "17 More recent findings have ledto the
same conclusion for large fallout shelters. A 1973
report by the Subcommitteeon Fallout of the National
Academy of Sciences on the radioiodine inhalation
problem stated this conclusion: "The opinion of the
Subcommittee is that inhalation is far less of a threat
than ingestion[eating or drinking], and does not justify
countermeasures such as filters in the ventilating
systems of shelters."18
Recommendations such as those above real-
istically face the fact that, if we suffer a nuclear
attack, the vast majority of Americans will
have only the fallout protection given by build-
ings andsomeexpedientshelters. Consequently,
how best to use available resources must be the
primary consideration when planning for pro-
tection against the worst dangers of a nuclear
attack; relatively minor hazards mayhaveto be
accepted. For unprepared people, inhalation of
fallout particles would be a minor danger com-
pared to being forced out of a shelter because of
dangerously inadequate ventilation.
The most dangerous fallout particles are
those deposited on the ground within the first
few hours after the explosion that produces
them. Typically, these "hot" particles would be
so large and fast-falling that they would not be
carried into expedient shelters equipped with
low-velocity air intake openings, such as those
described in this book. Nor would these most
dangerous "hot" fallout particles be "sucked"
into gooseneckair-intake pipes,orotherproper-
ly designed air-intake openings of a permanent
shelter.
Formostsheltersbuiltor improvedhurried-
ly during a crisis it will be impractical to pro-
vide filtered air. The Car-aver-Trench Shelter
pictured in Fig. 6.3 points up the overriding
need for pumped air for occupants of crowded
shelters during warm or hot weather. This sim-
ple shelter provides fallout protection about
four times as effective as thatgiven by a typical
home basement. After the car was driven over
the trench, earth was shoveled into the car and
its trunk and on top ofits hood. Atone end was a
combined crawlway entrance/air intake open-
ing, at the otherend, a 1-foot-squareairexhaust
opening. Each opening was covered by a small
awning. To keep loose shieldingearth from run-
ning under the carand intothe trench, the upper
edges of 5-foot-wide strips of polyethylene film
first were attached with duct tape to the sides
and ends of the car, about 2 feet above the
ground. Then earth was piled onto the parts of
the film strips that were lying on the ground, to
secure them. Finally, earth was piled against
the vertical parts of the attached film strips.
Fig. 6.3. 