 the narrowest opening in which you plan to
install it. Regardless of the size of the KAP you plan
to build, first study the instructions for making the
36 X 29-inch model.
In Section VII you willfind briefinstructions for
making a narrower and even simpler KAP, one more
suitable for the narrow openings of small trench
shelters and other small expedient shelters. Section
VIII covers large KAPs, for large shelters.
A. Materials Needed for a KAP
36 inches High by 29 inches Wide
The preferred material is listed as first (1st)
choice, and the less-preferred materials are listed as
(2nd), (3rd), and (4th) choices. It is best to assemble,
spread out, and check all your materials before
beginning to build.
I. The pump frame and its fixed support:
• Boards for the frame:
(Ist) 22 ft of I X 2-in. boards. (A nominal
X 2-in. board actually measures about
3/4 X 1_3/4 in., but the usual, nominal dimen-
sions will be given throughout these instruc-
tions.) Also, 6ft of IX I-in. boards. Soft wood
is better.
(2nd) Boards of the same length that have
approximately the same dimensions as 1 X 2-
in. and 1 X I-in. lumber.
(3rd) Straight sticks or metal strips that
can be cut and fitted to makea flat-faced KAP
frame.
• Hinges: (lst) Door or cabinet butt-hinges; (2nd)
metal strap-hinges; (3rd) improvised hinges made of
leather, woven straps, cords, or 4 eyescrews which
can be joined to make 2 hinges. (Screws are best for
attaching hinges. If nails are used, they should go
through the board and their ends should be bent over
and clinched-flattened against the surface of the
board.)
• A board for the fixed horizontalsupport: (1st) A
] X 4-in. board that is at least I ft longer than the
width of the opening in which you plan to swing your
pump; (2nd) A wider board.
• Small nails (at least 24): (1st) No.6 box nails,
about 1/2 in. longer than the thickness of the two
boards, so their pointed ends can be bent over and
clinched); (2nd) other small nails.
2. The flaps (See Figs. I, 2, 6, 7, and 8):
• Plastic film or other very light, flexible materi-
al-12 square feet in pieces that can be cut into 9
rectangular strips, each 30 X 51/2 in.: (lst) polyeth-
ylene film 3 or 4 mils thick(3 or 4one-thousandths of
an inch); (2nd) 2-mil polyethylene from large trash
bags; (3rd) tough paper.
• Pressure-sensitive waterproof tape, enough to
make 30 ft of tape 3/4 in. to 1in. wide, for securingthe
hem-tunnels of the flaps: (Ist) cloth duct tape (silver
tape); (2nd) glass tape; (3rd) scotch tape; (4th) freezer
or masking tape, or sew the hem tunnels. (Do not use
a tape that stretches: it may shrink afterward and
cause the flaps to wrinkle.)
3. The flap pivot-wires:
(1st) 30 ft of smooth wire at least as heavy and
springy as coat hanger wire, that can be made into
very straight pieces each 29 in. long (nine all-wire
coat hangers will supply enough); (2nd) 35 ft of
somewhat thinner wire, including light, flexible
insulated wire; (3rd) 35ft ofsmoothstring, preferably
nylon string about the diameter of coat hanger wire.ORNL DWG 71-7003
IX2-in. FRAME
\
Fig. 3. KAP frame (looking at the back side of
the frame).
1x:in. CENTER BRACE
NAIL HEADS
It the irame is made ot only one thickness oi
board 3/4in. to I in. thick, it will not be sufficiently
heavy to swing back far enough on its free-swinging
return stroke.
NOTE:
ALL WOOD FOR FRAME
IS CUT FROM IX2 in.
