 down and is facing away from
the centerofthe pump, and that a long edge ofthis part is level with
the outer side of the bottom. Remove the construction forms.
14. Paint the interiorofthe "cylinder" with sealer-after removing
all adhesive that may be in its corners.
15.After the sealer dries, sandpaper the interior of the "cylinder"
with fine sandpaper, and paint it again with the final coat of sealer.
16.Toattach the removable partofthe frontend XI,stand the "box"
on its completely open end and drill slightly oversize screw holes (for
your 2-in. screws) clear through the removable part ofthe front end,
as indicated by Fig. 9. With the flap valve facing outward,
temporarilyattach this part with afewsmall nails tothe end ofthetop
and to ends of the two sides. Then with a smaller-diameter bit, drill
the screw holes deep enough into the top and the sides so that the 7
screws will hold securely.
17. Sothat it will be unnecessary to tightly screwon the removable
part of the front end in order to make its repeated temporary
attachments airtight, tack felt weatherstripping (best 1/8-in. thick
and 5/8-in. wide), or strips made of two thicknesses of flannel, to the
contact edges of the top and the sides. No.3 (3/8-in.) carpet tacks
serve well. Then with a razor blade carefully cut the felt coveringthe
screw holes in the edges, and remove these small pieces of coveringMt .
18.Attach with screws the removable part of the front end.
19.To prevent damage to the front-end valve flaps when you stand
the pumpon its frontend, epoxy asmall piece of3/8-in. plywood to the
front end, near each of its four corners, as pictured in Figs. 3 and 5.
Before standingthe pumponits front end, usesmall pieces ofmasking
tape to temporarily secure its valve flaps in their closed positions.
20. Attach the back end XII, using only screws. See Fig. 8. (For
repairs. the back end may have to be removed.) To make the
attachmentofthe back end airtight, coat its attachment"crack"only
with rubber cement5. For the piston rod, saw from a straight, well-seasoned oak
board a 3/4 x 1-3/4 x 36-1/2-in. board. Sandpaper it smooth. (A piston
rod made of well-seasoned oak is less likely to break if abused, but
necessitatesusingscrews, inplace ofnails and staples, for attachments.
Piston rods made of nominal 1x 2-in. fir boards were undamaged in
the tests.)
6. To complete the piston rod:
a. For the handle, use 4 pieces of a nominal 1x 2-in. board cut to
the lengths shown in Fig. 15. Also see Fig. 16. Round all edges and
corners, to minimize the chances of the operators' blistering their
hands.
b. Paint the piston rod and its handle with sealer. When dry,
sandpaper. Then apply a final coat of sealer.
c. Use adhesive, screws, and nails (or adhesive and nails if your
piston rod isofsoft wood) in making the handle iIlustrated by Fig. 15.
~""';:':';--:.....;.:.:.fT
to
~::t±;~l.I. 13~
Fig. 15. Piston Rod Handle Made of 3/4 x 1-3/4-in. Boards.
Fig. 16. The Pump Handle of the Durability-Test Pump, showing
how one man best holds it when two men are pumping.
d. Toreduce friction on the piston rod and resultantenlargement
of the piston-rod hole with long use, coat with epoxy all four sides of
the piston-rod hole. See Figs. 7 and 16. Be sure that the piston rod
slidessnuglyyetfreely in its hole when the removable partofthefront
end is screwed in place.
e. From a piece of thick truck-tire inner-tube rubber, cuta 2-in.-
wide strip 12-in. long. To make the 2-in.-wide rubber bumper (see
Figs. 15and 16),connectone end of this rubber strip to the center ofa
3/4-in.-wide side of the piston rod. 