
people in cold weather. Except in hot and humid
weather, a constant air supply of about 10 cfrn per
shelter occupant is enough to maintain tolerable
conditions during continuous shelter occupancy for
many days.
If a factory-made blower capable of pumping
more than 100 cfrn is available, use it. Such a hand-
operated' blower can pump against mucn':mgnerau
flow resistances than a KAP can. It can pump its
full-rated volume of outdoor air through a shelter
equipped with two Overlapping-Flaps Blast Valves,
one ateachend of the shelterandeach with only
2 air openings-providing a total of 24 square
inches of openings per valve. Equally or more
effective is a homemakeable Plywood Double-
Action Piston Pump, made and operated as
described in Appendix E.
Remember that a pressure of 7200 pounds
pushes against each square foot of the exposed face ofa blast valve when it is subjected to a 50-psi blast
overpressure. Also keep in mind that the "suction" that
follows can exert an outwardly directed force of up to
700 pounds per square foot on the valve face and can
yank it out of position unless it is securely installed.
Figure 0.19shows how to securely install a blast valve.
(Merely nailing a blast valve in its opening will not
enable it to withstand severe blast forces.)
Note in Figure D.19 that an opening is
shown between the back edge of the uppermost
board of the Overlapping-Flaps BlastValve and
the adjacenthorizontalpoleofthe verticalentry.
Both this opening and the similar opening next
to thelowermostboardoftheBlastValve should
be closed off with a stout board, to prevent blast
from going through these openings and on into
a vertical entry and the shelter room.
Thetop ofan airshaftshouldbe a few inches
higher than the earth piled around it, as are the
tops of the vertical entries of the Small-Pole
Shelter illustrated in Figure A.3.1 on page 174.
To minimize the amount of rain that may fall
into an air shaft, a shed-like, open-sided minia-
ture roof should be placed over it, a few inches
aboveitstop.Theroofcanbe lightlyconstructed,
since it will be blown away by a severe blast.
• Minimize aboveground construction and the
mounding of shielding earth. At high overpressure
ranges, the shock wave and the blast-wind drag can
wreck an aboveground shelter entry. For example, the
5-ft-high earth mound over a shelter built with its pole
roof at ground level was moved enough by l-kiloton
air-blast effects at the 53-psi overpressure range to
break one of the poles ofa blast-doorframe. The forces
of a I-megaton explosion at the same overpressure
range would have operated 10 times as long, and
probably would havesmashed the vertical entryways of
this shelter. Whenever practical, a blast shelter should
be built far enough belowground so that the top of its
shieldingearthcover isat ground level.Avoidingabove-
ground construction and earth mounds also greatly
reduces the chances of damage from blast-hurled,
heavydebris, such astree trunksand piecesof buildings.
Dry earth, steeply mounded over a shelter which is
subjected to blast winds from a big explosion, will be
mostly blown away. However, blast-wind"scouring"of
wet earth isnegligible. The blast winds from a l-kiloton
explosionat the 31-psioverpressurerange scoured away
17inches of dry, sandy soil mounded at a slope of 32°.
If it is impractical to build a blast shelter with its
roof belowground, good protection can be attained by
moundingeven dry earthat slopes not steeper than 10°.
• Provide adequate shielding against initial nuclear
radiation. Good expedient blast shelters require a
greater thickness of earth cover than is needed on good
fallout shelters, for these reasons:
* Blast shelters should also protect against initial
nuclear radiation emitted by the fireball. This
radiation is reduced by half when it penetrates
about 5inches of packed earth (as compared to
a halving-thickness of only about 3Y2 inches of
earth against radiation from fallout).
* The initial radiation, in some areas where good
blast shelters will survive, can be much greater
than the fallout radiation is likely to be.
