 A of the
introductory section of this appendix.
• Materials and tools for buildingasimple
shelter-ventilating pump, a KAP 16 in. wide
and 28 in. high. (See Appendix B.) Only in
cold or continuously breezy, cool weather
can tolerable temperaturesand humidities be
maintained in a crowded underground
shelter without an air pump.
• Containers for storing adequate water.
(See Chapter 8.)
B. Useful Materials and Tools
• Large cans, buckets, and/or pots with
bail handles-in which to carry earth and
later to store drinking water or human
wastes.
• Two pillowcases and one bedsheet per
person-to make "sandbags" around shelter
openings and to cover trench walls. (If
available, large sheets of 4-mil polyethylene
are better than bedsheets, because they keep
earth walls damp and stable. They also help
keep shelter occupants dry and clean and
prevent earth from falling into their eyes.)
• File, knife, pliers, hammer.
• Measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler.
• Expedient life-support items.
5. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP.
6. Wear gloves from the start-even tough hands
can blister and become painful and infected after
hours of digging.
7. Check to be sure the earth is stable and firm
enough so that a trench shelter with unshored
(unsupported), vertical earth walls will be safe
from cave-ins. (Interior doors are not strong
enough to roof an earth-covered trench wider
than 3 ft.)
As a test of the stability of earth, dig a small
hole about 18 in. deep. Remove all loose earth
from the bottom of the hole. Then make a
"thumb test" by pushing your bare thumb into
the undisturbed surface at the bottom of the hole.
If you can push your thumb into the earth no
farther than one inch, the earth should be
suitable for this type of shelter. If the earth does
not pass the "thumb test," move to another
location and try the test again. Continue to
relocate and repeat until suitable earth is
found, or build a shored-trench or aboveground
shelter.
8. Prepare to dig a vertical-walled trench41/2 ft deep
and 3 ft wide. To determine the length of the
trench, add together the widths ofall the doors to
be used for roofingit, then subtract8in. from the
sum. (To avoid arithmetical errors, it is best to
lay all the doors side by side on the ground.)
9. Clear any brush, grass, or weeds that are more
than a few inches high from the area where the
trench will be dug. Also clear the ground around
all sides of the trench, to a distance of about 8ft
from the sides and ends of the trench.
10. Stake out a rectangular trench 36 in. wide, with
its length as determined above. Also stake outthe
.entrance at one end, as illustrated in Fig. A.l at
the end of Appendix A.l, and the ventilation
trench and opening at the other.
II. Dig the main trench, the entryway trench, and
the ventilation trench. Place the excavated earth
along both lengthwise sides of the trench,
starting at the outside edges of the cleared space.
Besure that no earth ispiled closer than 3ftto the
sides of the trench.
12. To be sure that unstable, unsafe earth is not
encountered at depths below 18 in., repeat the
"thumb test"each time the trench isdeepened an
additionalfoot. Ifthe earthdoes not pass the test,
do not dig the trench any deeper; try another
location.
13. To keep each trench its full width as it isdug, cut
a stick 36 in. long and another 18 in. long; use
them repeatedly from the start to check the
widths ofthe main trench and the entry trenches.
Keeping the trenches full width will save much
work and time later.
14. Carefully level and smooth the ground to a
distance of 21/2 ft from the sides of the trench, so
that the doors will lie flat on the ground up to the
edges of the trench.
15. If plenty of sheets, bedspreads, plastic, and/or
other materials are available, cover the trench
walls with them. Wall coverings should stop one
inch from the floor of the trench to prevent their
being stepped on and pulled down. 