 fallout iscaused by
radiation from visible fallout particles of heavy, sand-
like or flakey material. The air does not become
radioactive due to the radiation continuously given off
by fallout particles.
The visible fallout particles rapidly "fall out" of
slow moving air. The air that a KAP pumps through
a shelter moves at a low speed and could carry into
the shelter only a very small fraction of the fallout
particles thatcause the radiation hazard outside. This
fraction, usually not dangerous, can be further
reduced if occupants take the simple precautions
described in these instructions.
CAUTION
Before anyone starts to build this unusual type
of air pump, ALL WORKERS SHOULD READ
THESE INSTRUCTIONS AT LEAST UP TO
SECTION V, INSTALLATION. Otherwise, mis-
takes may be made and work may be divided
inefficiently.
When getting ready to build this pump, all
workers should spend the first half-hour studying
these instructions and getting organized. Then, after
materials are assembled, two inexperienced persons
working together should be able to complete the 3-
foot model described in the following pages in less
than 4 hours. To speed up completion, divide the
work; for example, one person can start making the
flaps while another begins work on the pump frame.
II. HOW A KAP WORKS
As can be seen in Figs. 1and 2, a KAP operates
by being swung like a pendulum. It is hinged at the
top of its swinging frame. When this air pump is
pulled by a cord as illustrated, its flaps are closed by
air pressure and it pushesair in front of it and "sucks"
ORNL-DWG 66-12320A
~"'" _""oo<,,~,""'''')
. /
PULL CORD
(SLACK)
Fig. 1. Section through the upper part of a
doorway, showing operation of a KAP.
ORNL-DWG 66-12319A
SHELTER
AREA
DOOR CASING
\------
\
PULL CORDSLACK
DURING RETURNSTROKE
SWINGING
PUMP FRAME
COVERING OVER UNUSED
LOWER PART OF DOORWAY
Fig. 2. KAP indoorway(withflaps openduring
its return stroke).
air in back of it. Thus a KAP pumps air through the
opening in which it swings. This is the power stroke.
During its power stroke, the pump's flaps are closed
against its flap-stop wires or strings, which are
fastened across the face of the frame.
When a KAP swings freely back as a pendulum
on its return stroke, all its flaps are opened by airpressure. The pumped air stream continues to flow in
the direction in which it has been accelerated by the
power stroke, while the Dump itself swings in the
opposite direction (see Fig. 2). Thus the flaps are
one-way valves that operateto force air to flow in one
direction, where desired.
The KAP can be used: (I) to supply outdoor air
to a shelter, (2) to distribute air within a shelter,
and/ or to fan the occupants.
1. To force outdoorairthrougha shelter,an air-
supply KAP usually is operated as an air-intake
pump by pulling it with a cord (see Fig. I). (Only
rarely is it necessary to operate a KAP as an air-
exhaust pump bypushing it with a pole, as described
in the last section of these instructions.)
2. To distribute air within a shelter and/or to
fan the occupants, air-distribution KAPs may be
hung overhead and operated as described later.
III. INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING A KAP
In this section, instructions are given for making
a KAP 36 inches high and 29 inches wide, to operate
efficiently when swinging in a typical home basement
doorway 30 inches wide. If your doorway or other
ventilation opening is narrower or wider than 30
inches, you should make your KAP I inch narrower
than the narrowest opening in which you plan to
install it. Regardless of the size of the KAP you plan
to build, first study the instructions for making the
36 X 29-inch model.
In Section VII you willfind briefinstructions for
making a narrower and even simpler KAP, one more
suitable for the narrow openings of small trench
shelters and other small expedient shelters. Section
VIII covers large KAPs, for large shelters.
A. 