 can be removed before building the
end-walls.
13. When smoothing the earth surfaces of the final
tops of the roll walls on both sides, check to see
that they have the sameslopeas the lowersides of
the roof doors will have after they are placed on
the roll walls. (A slope is necessary so that
rainwater reaching the waterproofcovering to be
placed over the doors will run offthe lower side.)
Study Fig. AA.
14. After the side-walls have been completed (except
for their ends that form the sides ofan entry) and
after the door-forms have been removed, use the
samedoors for forms to build the two 22-in.-wide
entries.
15. Useearth-filled "sand bags"(made ofpillowcases
or sacks, and/or the tucked-in ends of earth-
filled rolls) to make the outer ends of each
entryway.
16. Make the two doorway frames if lumber, nails,
and a saw areavailable. Makeeach frame as high
as the wall on each side of it, and slope the top
board of each frame so that it will press flat
against the doorto be supported. (Ifmaterialsfor
a frame are lacking, place a single 2 by 4-in.
board-or a poleabout 6ft.long-across the top
of the entry, in the position shown in Fig. AAfor
the top of the doorway frame.)
17. After carefully removing all the temporary
braces from the door-forms and the doors
themselves, improve the slopes of the tops of all
supporting walls so that the doors will be
supported evenlyand, without beingtwisted, will
make contact with the smooth, sloping earth or
cloth.upon which they will rest.
18. If more than enough waterproof plastic or
similar material is available to cover all the roof
doors, also cover the tops of the walls on which
the roof doors will rest. This will keep the doors
from absorbing water from damp earth.
19. Dig the illustrated 14-in.-deep, 36-in.-wide
trench inside the shelter. (Ifthe water table istoo
high to dig down 14 in., in some locations the
walls can be raised to a height of 38in. by cutting
turf sods and laying them on top of the walls.
Another way the wall height can be increased is
by making additional rolls.)
20. Place the roof doors in their final positions, and
cover them with waterproof material (if avail-
able). Be sure the waterproof material is folded
under the higher edges ofthe doors-to keep the
material from slipping downward on the sloping
doors as earth is shoveled onto the roof.
21. Extend the waterproof material on top of the
doors a couple of feet beyond the lower ends of
the doors-if enough material is available to
cover all of the roof doors.
22. When shoveling the first layer of earth onto the
rainproof material protecting the doors, avoid
hitting and possibly puncturing it with rocks or
sharp pointed roots in the earth.
23. To make earth arching more effective m
supporting most of the earth to be placed on the
roof doors, first mound earth on and near the
ends of the doors.
24. Cover the roof with at least 20 in. ofearth. Make
sure that there also is a thickness of at least 20 in.
of earth at the corners of both the room and
entries.25. To prevent surface water from running into the
shelter if it rains hard, mound packed earth
about 5 in. high just inside the two entries. Rain
can be kept out by a small canopy or awningthat
extends 2 or 3 ft in front ofthe outermostedge of
a doorway that roofs an entry.
26. If any waterproof material remains, use it to
cover the floor of the shelter.
27. If the weather iswarm or hot, install a 16-in.-wide
by24-in.-high air pump(a KAP). Attach its hinges
to the board across the roofofthe entry into which
outside air is moving naturally at the time. (If
shortof time ormaterials for a KAP, make a
small Directional Fan.)
28. Cover all exposed combustible material with
mud, earth, or otherfireproofmaterial, to reduce
the chance of exposed cloth being ignited from a
nuclear explosion or heat from a nearby fire.
29. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. 