 in areas where the water
table or rock is very near the surface.
* It is impractical to build them in deep-frozen
ground.
* They are usually more crowded- and uncom-
fortable than improved basement shelters.
EXPEDIENT BLAST SHELTERS
Advantages of expedient blast shelters:
* Occupants of expedient blast shelters de-
scribed in Appendix D could survive uninjured in
extensive blast areas where fallout shelters would not
prevent death or injury.
* Blast doors would protect occupants from shock
waves, dangerous overpressures, blast winds, and
burns on exposed skin caused by the popcorningeffect
and heated air.
* The expedient blast shelters described in
Appendix D of this book were built and blast
tested in Defense Nuclear Agency blast tests.
Their air-supply systems were not damaged by
blasteffectsthatwould have bentoverorbroken
off the aboveground, vertical air-supply pipes
typical of even expensive imported Swiss and
Finnish permanent family blast shelters. (Not-
withstanding this weakness, such permanent
blast shelters will save many lives.) The hori-
zontal blastdoors ofthese testedexpedient blast
shelters were not damaged because they were
protected on all sides by spiked-together blast-
protector logs surrounded by ramped earth. (In
contrast, the horizontal blast door of the most
expensive blast shelter described in a widely
distributed Federal Emergency Management
Agency pamphlet (number H-12-3) is unpro-
tected on its sides. This untested blast door
probably would be torn off and blown away if
struck by a strong blast wave, following blast
winds, and pieces ofhouses and treesthat would
be hurled hundreds of feet.)
* The blast-tested expedient blast valve de-
scribed in Appendix D will prevent entry of
blastwaves througha shelter'sventilationpipes
and resultant destruction of the ventilation
pump and possible injury of occupants.
Disadvantages of expedient blast shelters:
* They require more time, materials, tools,
skill, and work than are needed for building
expedient fallout shelters.
* Especially expedient blast shelters should
be well separated from buildings and woods
that if burned are likely to produce dangerous
quantities ofcarbon monoxide and toxic smoke.
* Theirventilation openings permitthe entry
of many morefallout particles than do the venti-
lation pipes with goosenecks andfilters oftypi-
cal permanent blast shelters. (However, deadly
local fallout probably willnot be a majordanger
in the blast areas where the great majority of
Americans live, because a rational enemy will
employ air bursts to destroy the mostly "soft"
targets found in those areas. Air bursts can
destroy mostmilitarily significant"soft" targets
over about twice as many square miles as can
the surface or near-surface burstingofthe same
weapons. Fortunately, air bursts produce only
tiny particles, and only a smallfraction ofthese,
while they still are very radioactive, are likely
to be promptly broughtto earth in scattered"hot
spots" by rain-outs and snow-outs. Thus rela-
tively few prompt fatalities or delayed cancer
cases from air-burstfallout are likelyto result-
even from the air bursting of today's smaller
Soviet warheads that would inject most oftheir
particles into the troposphere at altitudes from
which wet deposition can take place.
WARNING: Permanent home fallout and
blast shelters described in widely available
FEMA pamphlets have protection factors in
line with the PF 40 minimum standard for
public shelters in buildings. In heavy fallout
areas a sizeable fraction of the occupants of PF
40 shelters will receive radiation doses large
enough to incapacitate or kill them later. Per-
manent shelters built specifically to protect
against nuclear weapon effects should have
PFs much higher than PF 40.
None of the permanent home or family
shelters described in official OCD, DCPA, or
FEMA free shelter-building instruction pam-
phlets have been built for evaluation and/or
testing - a finding confirmed to the author in
1987 by a retired shelterspecialistwhofor some
20 years served in Washington with FEMA and
its predecessors.Chapter 6
Ventilation and Cooling of Shelters
CRITICAL IMPORTANCE
If high-protection-factor shelters or most other
shelters that lack adequate forced ventilation were
Iullv occupied for several days in warm or hot
weather. they would become so hot and humid that
the occupants would collapse from the heat if they
were to remain inside. 