The most practical hinge that the author
has devised is illustrated by the drawing. This
flexible hinge is much less likely to be broken
than are conventional hinges, and makes it
easier to build the two large covering pieces to
fit over the opened doors. Note that the upper
edge of the lower large piece goes under the
rainproofing, 6-inch-wide rubber flap, which is
nailed only along the lower edge of the upper
large covering piece. Then the two large pieces
are held and hinged together byfirst stretching
each of 2 strong, 2-inch-wide rubber bands (or
rustproof springs) attached by cords to the
upper large covering piece, and then hooking
its attached bent-wire hook onto a nylon cord
loop connected to the lower large covering
piece. Eachstrongrubberband(cutfrom a truck
innertube) and its attached hook and nylon
cords is 5 inches from an opened door. Thus
hinged, the lower large piece can be easily
raised to permit a person to step out of or into
the stairway entry. When this hinged lower
large piece is closed and tied down, a 2.7 square
foot protected ventilation opening with a 10-
inch overhang results.
N
"
0....
z~lQ
000
zOgwo
0a:...J
~UJUJ
,.o.UJ...JO' ....
0.:::>(1)
~
o........oal
To keepthetwo large pieces
from moving sideways, one 1 x
2-inch board is nailed near each
of their side edges, spaced so as
to lie against the outside of each
opened, upright steel door. To
strengthenthehingelineedge of
the upper large covering piece,
a i x 2-inchboard is nailed along
its lower edge.
The lower of the two large covering pieces
also has a reinforcing 1 x 2 nailed near its
hinged edge.
the door near its top. Then air entering the
shelter room will have to rise at least 4 feet
abovethe entrywayfloor, andmostof thelarger
fallout particles will be deposited on the entry-
way floor.)
Thechipboardpieceattached
to the upper ends of the doors
also has two 1x 2 boards nailed
near each end, forming grooves
into whichthe upper ends ofthe
doorsfit. Thedoorsarethusheld
in their upright positions and
rain, etc. is kept from falling or
being blown through the upper
end into the entryway.
The uppermost of the two
lar~e covering pieces of chip-
board(orexteriorplywood)rests
on the opened doors and is kept
from slipping down by a 1 x 2-
inch board nailed 4 inches from
its upper end. This small board
"hooks" over the upper edge of
the piece of chipboard (or ply-
wood) attachedtotheupperends
of the steeldoors. (See thedraw-
ing on the side of this column.)
This large piece of chipboard is
securely tied to the doors.Selected References
1. Radiobiological Factors in Manned Space
Flight, Space Radiation Study Panel of the Life
Sciences Committee, Space Science Board, National
Academy of Sciences, National Research Council,
1967.
2. Personal communication with Dr. C. C.
Lushbaugh, Chairman, Medical and Health Science
Division, Oak Ridge Associated Universities, inJune
1977.
3. The Effects of Nuclear Weapons, 1962,
Samuel Glasstone, Editor, published by U.S. Atomic
Energy Commission, April 1962.
4. "Adequate Shelters and Quick Reactions to
Warning: A Keyto Civil Defense,"Francis X. Lynch,
Science, Vol. 142, pp. 665-667, 1963.
5. Blast Tests ofExpedient Shelters inthe DICE
THROW Event, Cresson H. Kearny and Conrad V.
Chester, Oak Ridge National Laboratory Report No.
5347, February 1978.
6. The Effects ofNuclear Weapons, 1977,Third
Edition, Samuel Glasstone and Philip J. Dolan,
Editors, U.S. Department of Defense and U.S.
Department of Energy, 1977.This most authoritative
publication has numerous sections written for non-
technical educated readers. In 1986, a cloth-bound
copy can be purchased for $17.00 from the Superin-
tendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. 