 LEAVESHANG ~
PERPENDICULAR ANDTOUCHING.I
To prevent possible partial discharge from overly sharp lower corners of
the leaves, use scissors to cut about 1/16 inch ( .. ) offeach lower corner of
the twoleaves. (Partialdischargefrom an overlysharpcornermayprevent
a KRM's leavesfrom beingadequatelychargedand adequatelyseparated.)
To make it easier to take .accurate readings:
a. Make a black stripe 1/8-inch wide on the hem side of the lower edge of
each leaf, if the drying agent to be used is white anhydrite made from
gypsum,orlightblueDrterite,Itis besttouse a waterproofmarker. such
as black Marko by Flair.
b. ~ak~ a white stripe, ifthe drying agenttobe used isdarkblue silicagel.
LIqUId Paper correction fluid, or white ink, serves well.
*If using epoxy or other glue, use only a very little to hold down the hem, to
attach the thread securely to the leaf and to glue together any open edges of the
plied foil. Most convenient is "one hour" epoxy, applied with a toothpick. Model
airplane cement requires hours to harden when applied between sheets of
aluminum foil. To make sure no glue stiffens the free thread beyond the upper
.corners ofthe finished leaf, put no glue within 1/4 inch of a point where thread will
go out from the folded hem ofthe leaf.
The instructions in step 11 are for persons lacking "one hour" epoxy or the time
required to dry other types of glue. Persons using glue instead of tape to attach the
leaf to its thread should make appropriate use of the pattern on the following page
and ofsome ofthe procedures detailed in steps 12through 18.
18. Cut 5 pieces of Band-Aid tape, each approximately
1/8 inch by 1/4 inch, this small.
Use 2 of these pieces of tape to secure the centers of the side edges of the leaf.
Place the 5 pieces as illustrated in the SIDE VIEW sketch below. Or use tiny
droplets of epoxy, applied with a needle, to securethe sideedges andto
hold down the hem. ORNL DWG 766542
19.
20.
I \
1\I \
I \I 'r-----.JI (
I
I
I
~IICut out Pattern (C), the guide sheet used when attaching a leaf to its
suspending thread, Then tape Pattern (C) to the top of a work table.
Cover the two "TAPE HERE" rectangles on Pattern (C) with pieces of
tape, each piece the size of the rectangle. Then cut two other pieces of
tape each the same size and use them to tape the thread ONTO the guide
sheet, on top of the "TAPE HERE" rectangles.
Be very careful not to touch the two l-inch parts of the thread next to the
outline of the finished leaf. since oil and dirt even on clean fingers will
reduce the electrical insulating value of the thread between the leaf and
the top rim of the can.
If no epoxy glue· is available to hold down the hem and prevent the
thread from slipping in the hem, cut two pieces of tape (Band-Aid tape is
best; next best is masking or freezer tape; next best, Scotch tape). After
first peeling off the paper backing of Band-Aid tape, cut each piece of
tape 1/8 inch by I inch long. Attach these two pieces of tape to the
finished 8-ply aluminum leaf with the sticky sides up, except for their
ends. As shown by the pattern on the following pattern page, secure 118
inch of one end of a tape strip near one corner of the 8-ply aluminum foil
leaf by first turning under this 1I8-inch end; that is, with this end's
sticky side down. Then turn under the other 1I8-inch-long end, and
attach this end below the THREAD LINE. Slant each tape strip as
illustrated on Pattern (C).
13. With the thread still taped to the paper pattern and while slightly lifting
the thread with a knife tip held under the center of the thread, slip the
finished leaf under the thread and into position exactly on the top of the
leaf outlined on the pattern page. Hold the leaf in this position with two
fingers.
Be sure you have read through step 18before you do anything else.
12. Cut an 8-1;'2inch piece of fine, unwaxed, very clean thread that has not been
anti-static treated. 