 out of
theairthey breathewould notbe essential survival
equipment.IS Most fallout particles tiny enough to
enterone's lungs would fall to earth so slowlythat
they would reach ground thousandsof miles away
from the explosions. By then, radioactive decay
would make them much less dangerous, and their
depositionwouldbespreadoutovermuchoftheearth.
In pastyearsAmerican-endangeringSovietwar-
heads typically were between20 andone megaton.
Explosions this large would inject almost all fall-
outparticles intothestratosphere, high above rain
clouds. Todaythousandsof deployed SovietICBM
warheads are between 550 and 100 kilotons. (See
Jane's Weapon Systems, 1987-88.)Both surface bursts
and air bursts of today's smaller warheads would
inject most of their radioactive particles into the
troposphere,from whence rain-outsandsnow-outs
would bring huge numbers of even tiny particles
to earth in "hot spots" scattered across America.
Persons living in dry, windy areas often wear dust
masks and goggles to protect their noses and eyes from
dust and sand particles. Iffallout particles are mixed with
CLOTHING TO PROTECT AGAINST
BETA BURNS
Such sandals also have the advantage of enabling one
to wear socks and other foot insulation inside the
straps.
If fresh and very radioactive fallout particles
remain for long on the skin or extremely close to the
skin, beta burns result. Any clothing that keeps fallout
off the skin helps greatly. The best expedient protection
is given by an outer layer ofeasily-removable clothing
similarto the improvised rainwearpreviouslydescribed,
but fully covering the hair and neck and providing
plastic trousers instead of chaps. Removable shoe
coverings are highly advisable. All such protective
coverings should be removed before entering a shelter,
or removed in the entryway before going into the
shelter room.homemade types, and the following instructions for
making and using it have been field-tested.
AN INDIVIDUALLY-FITIED
FALLOUT MASK
Materials Needed:
1. Three rectangular pieces of fluffy toweling (terry
cloth preferred), each piece approximately 12X IS
inches (or use 10 men's handkerchiefs).
2. Elastic. (The best expedient elastic is from the
waistband of a man's undershorts.)
3. Clear plastic (froma photo album, billfold, plastic
storm window, etc.).
4. Sewing materials.
Measurements:
I. Tie a string vertically around your head and face,
passing it 1/2inch in front ofeach of your ears and
making it quite tight.
2. Tie a second string horizontally around your
head, crossing your forehead 11/4 inches above the
top of your eye sockets. These two strings should
cross each other at points X and x', over your
temples.
3. Measure the distance X-to-XI across. your
forehead and the distance X-to-XI going under
yourchin(around your lowerjawand next to your
throat), as indicated by Fig. 15.9.
Construction:
I. Cut out 3 pieces of terrycloth, making the width of
each piece equal to X-to-XI (the curved distance
across yourforehead), and the height ofeach piece
equal to the distance X-to-Y plus 1/2 inch-that is,
equal to half the distance X-to-XI (measured
under your chin) plus 1/2 inch. See Fig. 15.9.
2. Cut the lower edge of each piece as illustrated.
3. Stitch the 3 pieces of terry cloth together, one on
top of the other, thus makingthe mask three layers
thick. Stitch around all four edges of the cloth
rectangle and down the centerline.
4. Mark and cut out the eye holes, as illustrated.
Make the mask's dimensions smaller for children.
5. Cut one rectangle of clear plastic measuring
51/2 X 21/4 inches, and sew this plastic over the
outside of the eye holes, stitching the plastic
around its edges and down the centerline.
6. Fold the three pieces along their vertical center-
line and stitch the lower side together, along the
upper stitch line Y_to_yI . Stitch 1/2 inch from the
lower edge. Then sew a second row of stitches.
7. Sew on the elastic head bands, making them short
enough to hold the mask tightly around yourface.
