aminated
sand. The fallout on these islanders' scalps, bare
necks, and the tops of their bare feet caused itching
and burning sensations after a time. Days later, beta
burns resulted, along with extreme discoloration of
the skin. Beta burns are not deep burns; however, it
took weeks to heal them. Some, in spite of proper
medical attention, developed into ulcers. (No serious
permanent skin injury resulted, however.)
For survivors confined inside crowded,
unsanitary shelters by heavy fallout, and without
medicines, beta burns could be a worse problemthan
were similar burns to the Marshall Islanders.
All of the Marshall Islanders unknowingly ate
fallout-contaminated food and drank fallout-
contaminated water for two days. Mainly as a result
of this, radioactive iodine was concentrated in their
thyroid glands, and thyroid abnormalities developed
years later. (There isa simple, very low-cost means of
attaining almost complete protection against this
delayed hazard: taking minute prophylactic doses of
a salt, potassium iodide. This will be discussed in
Chapter 13.)
In dry, dusty, windy areas the human nasal
passages usually filter out much dust. A large part of
it is swallowed and may be hazardous if the dust is
contaminated with fallout. Under such dry, windy
conditions, beta burns also could be caused by large
amounts of dust lodged inside the nasal passages.
Breathing through a dust mask, towel, or other clothwould give good protection against this localized
hazard. In conclusion: persons under nuclear attack
should make considerable effort to protect them-
selves from beta radiation.
• Alpha particles, identical to the nuclei ofhelium
atoms, are given off by some of the radioactiveatoms
in fallout. These particles have very little penetrating
power: 1 to 3 inches of air will stop them. It is
doubtful that alpha particles can get through
unbroken skin; they cannot penetrate even a thin
fabric.' Alpha particles are hazardous only if
materials that emit them (such as the radioactive
element plutonium) enter the body and are retained
in bone, lung tissue, or other parts of the body. Any
shelter that excludes fallout .particles affords
excellent protection against this radiation danger.
Unless survivors eat or drink fallout-contaminated
food or water in considerably larger quantities than
did the completely uninformed natives of the
Marshall Islands, danger from alpha particles would
be minor.
PROTECTION AGAINST OTHER NUCLEAR
WEAPONS EFFECTS
• Flash burns are caused by the intense rays of
heat emitted from the fireball within the first minute
following an explosion." This thermal radiation
travels at the speed of light and starts to heat or burn
exposed people and materials before the arrival ofthe
blast wave. Thermal radiation is reduced-but not
eliminated-ifit passes through rain, dense clouds, or
thick smoke. On a clear day, serious flash burns on a
person's exposed skin can be caused bya 20-megaton
explosion that is 25 miles away.
A covering of clothing-preferably of white
cloth that reflects light-can reduce or prevent flash
burns on those who are in a large part of an area in
which thermal radiation is a hazard. However, in
areas close enough to ground zero for severe blast
damage, the clothing of exposed people could be set
on fire and their bodies badly burned.
• Fires ignited by thermal radiation and those
resulting from blast and other causes especially
would endanger people pinned down by fallout while
in or near flammable buildings. Protective measures
against the multiple dangers from fire, carbon mon-
oxide, and toxic smokes are discussed in Chapter 7.
• Flash blindness can be caused by the intense
light from an explosion tens of miles away in clear
weather. Although very disturbing, the blindness is
not permanent; most victims recover within seconds
to minutes. Among the Hiroshima and Nagasaki
survivors (people who had been in the open more
than persons expecting a nuclear attack would be),
there were a number of instances of temporary
blindness that lasted as long as 2 or 3 hours, but only
one case of permanent retinal injury was reported."
Flash blindness may be produced by scattered
light; the victim of this temporary affliction usually
has not looked directlyat the fireball. Flash blindness
would be more severe at night, when the pupils are
larger. Retinal burns, a permanent injury, can result
at great distances if the eye is focused on the fireball.
