
and requires less manual dexterity
than does a I-handled fan with the
same size blade. With this small 2-
handled fan you quite easily can force
about 300 cubic feet per minute (300
efm)of outdoorair through a crowded
trench or basement shelter. This is
enough air for up to 9 adults crowded
into a small shelter in extremely hot.
humid weather, and enough for about
100 people in cold weather. By fanning
vigorously, 500 to 600 cubic feet per
minute have been forced through a
small covered-trench shelter.
To make a durable 2-handled fan, first make its frame oufof2 sticks each
14 inches long and 2 sticks each 22 inches long. See sketch. To strengthen
the corners, overlap the sticks about one-half inch, as shown.
When using sticks cut from a tree, select ones with diameters of about %
inch, and make shallow notches in all 4 sticks before tying together the 4
corners of the blade. If you do not have strong string, use %-inch-wide strips
of bedsheet cloth, or other strong cloth, slightly twisted.
If using sawed sticks, be sure to use none smaller than b x31< inch in cross
section. If you have very small nails or brads, use only one to connect each
corner; then tie each corner securely. To prevent possible blistering of
hands, wrap cloth around the fan handles, or wear gloves.
To cover the fan's blade, any strong, light fabric, such as bedsheet cloth,
serves welLIfyou are going to sew on the cloth, first cut a 26 x30-inch piece.
Wrap the 30-inch width smoothly crosswise around the frame, aftercutting4
notches in the cloth's corners, so that the tied-together parts of the sticks will
not be covered. Pin or tape the cloth to make a smooth blade; finally sew
securely. (If waterproof construction adhesive is available, a smaller piece of
cloth can be used and the blade can be covered ill a very few minutes.)
If time and/or materials are very limited, make a fanwith its blade
merely a piece ofcloth connecting two 22-inch-long sticks, This very
simple fan is reasonably effective, although tiring to use.
Cardboard covering a blade is likely to become damp and fragile in the
humid air of a crowded shelter. Very light sheetmetalmakes a good fan blade
and requires only 2 sticks. A blade of 'I4-inch plywood is too heavy.
If no sticks are available, a double thickness of heavy, stiff cardboard 22
inches long by 14 inches wide will pump almost as much air if used as a
handleless fan. The pieces should be securely tied or taped together. If
waterproof tape is available, cover the parts that you will grip with sweaty
hands, thus preventing dampening and softening the cardboard.
For maximum ventilation, the air-intake opening of a shelter should be at
least as large as its air-exhaust opening. (If the air-exhaust opening of your
small shelter is much larger than that shown in the sketches, block part of it
off to reduce it to approximately this 24-inch-high by 20-inch-wide size, for
more effective use with this fan.) The air should be fanned out of the shelter
in the direction in which the air is naturally flowing. Formaximum ventilation
rate, fan about 40 strokes per minute.
Directional Fanning is the simplest way to force enough outdoor air
through typical basement; trench, and other expedient shelters to maintain
endurable conditions, even in extremely hot, humid weather.
During a worsening nuclear crisis most unprepared citizens probably
will not have the time and/or materials needed to make a KAP or other
efficient shelter-ventilating pump - even if they have the instructions. In
contrast. tests with average citizens have indicated that if they have
instructions for making and using Directional Fans and if there are a few
hours of warning time before the attack, then the majority will be able to
ventilate all of their expedient shelters, except some of the largest.
The principal disadvantage of Directional Fans is that they are more
laborious tooperate than are KAPs, thatare manually powered, pendulum-
like air pumps that conserve energy.60
A durable but laboriously heavy fan can be made in a few minutes using a
20 x 30-inch piece of I/,-inch plywood nailed to a single 46-inch-Iong, 1 x 2-
inch hoard. Or use a single round stick about 11"inches in diameter, flattened
on one side.
