 them. Outside the blast and/or
fire areas, the use of shelters inside buildings
would not be nearly as hazardous. However, an
enemy might also target some areas into which
large numbers of urbanAmericans hadevacua-
ted before the attack, although such targetting
is notbelievedto be included inSovietstrategy.
Earth-covered expedient shelters in a blast area
give better protection against injury from blast, fire,
or fallout than do almost all basements. But during
the more likely kinds of crises threatening nuclear
war most urban Americans, including those who
would evacuate into areas outside probable blast
areas, probably would lack the tools, materials,
space, determination, physical strength, or time
required to build good expedient shelters that are
separate from buildings and covered with earth. As a
result, most unprepared urban citizens would have to
use basements and other shelters in existing
structures, for want of better protection.
Shelters in buildings, including basement shelters,
have essentially the same requirements as expedient
shelters: adequate shielding against fallout radiation,
strength, adequate ventilation-cooling, water, fallout
radiation meters, food, hygiene,etc.Sketches and short
descriptions of ways to improve the fallout protection
afforded by home basements are to befound in widely
distributed civil defense pamphlets, including two
entitled "In Time of Emergency," and "Protection in
the Nulear Age." In 1987, millions of copies of
these pamphlets are stockpiled for possible
distributionduringa crisis.Unfortunately, most
of such official instructions were written years
ago, whenthedeliverable megatonnage andthe
numberof Sovietwarheadswere smallfractions
of what they are today. Official civil defense
instructions now available to average Ameri-
cans do not inform the reader as to what degree of
protection against fallout radiation (what protection
factor) isgiven by the differenttypes of do-it-yourself
shelters pictured. There is no mention of dependable
ways to provide adequate cooling-ventilation, an
essential requirement ifeven a home basementisto be
occupied by several families in warm or hot weather.
Outdated or inadequate information is given about
water, food, the improvement of shelter in one's
home, and other survival essentials.
No field-tested instructions at present are
available to guide householders who may want to
strengthen the floor over a home basement so that it
can safely support 2feet of shieldingearth piled on it.
In areas of heavy fallout, such strengthening- often
would be needed to safely support adequate overhead
shielding, especially ifthe house were to bejarredby a
light shock from a distant explosion. In the following
paragraphs, a way to greatly improve the fallout
protection afforded by a typical home basement is
outlined. If improved in this manner, a basement
would provide excellent fallout protectionfor several
families.
First, earth should be placed on the floor above
to a depth of about one foot. Earth can be carried
efficiently by using sacks or pillowcases, using the
techniques described in Chapter 8for carryingwater.
If earth is not available because the ground isfrozenor because of the lack of digging tools, other heavy
materials (containers of water, heavy furniture,
books, etc.) should be placed on the floor above.
These materials should weigh enough to produce a
loading of about 90 pounds per square foot-about
the same weight as earth one foot thick. This initial
loading of the floor joists causes them to carry some
of the weight that otherwise would be supported by
the posts that then are to be installed.
Next, a horizontal beam is installed so as to
support all of the floor joists under their centers.
Figure 5.8 shows a beam and one of its supporting
posts. Such a supporting beam preferably is made by
nailing three 2X6s securely together. (Three 2X4s
would serve quite well.)
DRHl-OWG 7g.18368
NOTCH (IN END
OF JOISTI THAT
RESTS ON WALL
BRACE BOARDS
PRESSED TIGHT
AGAINST THE
FOURWALLS
BASEMENT
FLOOR
Fig. 5.8. Supporting beam and one of its posts
installed to increase the load of shielding material
that can be carried safely by the floor above a
home basement.
Cut posts to fitexactly underthe beam. Iftrees at
least 4 inches in diameter are not available, make
posts by nailing boards together. Position the two
outermost posts within 2 feet of the ends of the beam.
