 longer available,
yellow corn, carrots, and green, leafy vegetables
(including dandelion greens) would be the best
sources. If these foods were not obtainable, the next
best source would be sprouted whole-kernel wheat
or other grains-if seeds could be sprouted for three
days in the light, so that the sprouts are green.
Although better than no source, sprouting is not
a very satisfactory way to meet vitamin A require-
ments. The development of fibrous roots makes
3-day sprouted wheat kernels difficult to eat. And
one must eat a large amount of seeds with green
sprouts and roots to satisfy the recommended daily
emergency requirements-up to 51/ 2 cups of 5-day
sprouted alfalfa seeds. Survivors of a nuclear attack
would wish they had kept an emergency store of
multivitamin pills.
• Vitamin 0
Without vitamin D, calcium is not adequately
absorbed. As a result, infants and children would
develop rickets (a disease of defective bone mineral-
ization). A massive nuclear attack would cut off
the vast majority of Americans from their main
source of Vitamin D, fortified milk.
Vitamin D can be formed in the body if the
skin is exposed to the ultraviolet rays of the sun.
Infants should be exposed to sunlight very cau-
tiously, initially for only a few minutes-especially
after a massive nuclear attack. Such an attack
possibly could causeatmospheric changes thatwould
permit more ultraviolet light to reach the earth's
surface, causing sunburn in the U.S. as severe
as on the equator today. In cold weather, maxi-
mum exposure of skin to sunlight is best done in a
shallow pit shielded from the wind. Exposure in a
shallow pit would give about 90 percent pro-
tection from gamma radiation from fallout
particles on the surrounding ground.
• Niacin and Calcium
Niacin deficiency causes pellagra, a disease that
results in weakness, a rash on skin exposed to the
sun, severe diarrhea, and mental deterioration. If a
typical modern American had a diet primarily of
corn and lacked the foods that normally supply
niacin, symptoms of pellagra would first appear in
about 6 months. Since corn is by far our largest
crop-the U.S. production in 1985 was about 425
billion pounds-theskillful treatment of corn would
be important to post-attack survival and recovery.
During the first part of this century, pellagra
killed thousands of Americans in the South each
year. These people had cornfor their principalstaple
and ate few animal protein foods or beans. YetMexicans, who eat even more corn than did those
Southerners-and have even fewer foods of animal
origin-do not suffer from pellagra.
The Mexicans' freedom from pellagra is mainly
due to their traditional method of soaking and
boiling their dried corn in a lime-water solution.
They use either dry, unslaked lime (calcium oxide, a
dangerously corrosive substance made by roasting
limestone) or dry, slaked lime (calcium hydroxide,
made by adding water to unslaked lime). Dry lime
weighing about I% as much as the dry corn isadded
to the soak water, producing an alkaline solution.
Wood ashes also can be used instead of lime to make
an alkali solution. Thealkalitreatment of corn makes
the niacin available to the human body..Tables 9.1
and 9.2 show corn as having adequate niacin.
However, the niacin in dried corn is not readily
available to the body unless the corn has received
an alkali treatment.
Treating corn with lime has another nutritional
advantage: the low calcium content of corn issignifi-
cantly increased.
• Fat
The emergency recommendation for fat is
slightly over I ounce per day (30 g) of fat or cooking
oil. This amount of fat provides only 10% of the
calories in the emergency diet, which does not specify
a greater amount because fats would be in very short
supply after a nuclearattack. This amount isvery low
when compared to the average diet eaten in this
country, in which fat provides about 40% of the
calories. It would be difficult for many Americans to
consume sufficient calories to maintain normal
weight and morale without a higher fat intake; more
fat should be made available as soon as possible.
Increased fat intake is especially importantfor young
children, to provide calories needed for normal
growth and development. 