ase smeared on the suspending string or wire will
stop all crawlers. Metal and strong plastic containers
with tight lids protect food best.
The hygienic preparation and serving of food in
a shelter, especially in hot weather, require that all
cooked food beeaten promptly. It isbest to eatwithin
half-an-hour after cooking. Canned foods should be
consumed shortly after opening. The cleaning and
disinfecting of utensils, bowls, etc., should be done
promptly, to prevent bacteria from multiplying and
to lessen the chances of ants and other insects being
attracted into the shelter. Sugarshould be mixed with
cereals in the cooking pot, to avoid spilling.
In Oak Ridge National Laboratory shelter tests,
only a few infants and toddlers have been included
among the occupants. Feeding infants and small
children over a piece of plastic would be one good
way to keep the inevitablespillagefrom complicating
shelter life.
To avoid using dishes, most foods can be served
on squares of plastic. Spoons and such plastic"dishes" can be licked clean after eating. then
disinfected by boiling or by dipping them into
chlorine bleach solution containing one tablespoon
of Clorox-type bleach to a quart of water.
A shelter occupant without a spoon can cat very
thick grain mush in a sanitary manner by placing it on
a piece of plastic held in his hand. forming it into a
ball. and taking bites. Although Chinese peasants
often eat wet-rice balls held in their bare hands.
experiments have indicated not unexpectedly
that Americans 00 not like to eat this way.
Cooking without oil or fat makes disinfecting
utensils much easier when water and fuel arc being
conserved. Cereals and sugar arc easy to wash off
with a little water. without soap.
CONTROL OF INSECTS
Insect sprays used in high-protection-factor
shelters are likely 'to cause more problems than they
eliminate. Poisonous insecticides should be used with
caution. Insect repellents on the skin and clothing are
generally helpful. but not likely to be in sufficient
supply to last for weeks or months. Some insect
problems and simple means ofcontrolling them are
described below.
Mosquitoes would multiply rapidly afteran attack.
because normal control measures would not be in
effect. Using insect screen or mosquito netting to cover
the ventilation openings of a shelter is the best way to
keep out mosquitoes. flies. and all larger insects. The
lack of insect screening-when it would be too
lateto obtain any-could resultin more harrass-
. rnent, discomfort and possible disease than
most people accustomed to modern living are
likely to imagine. However. if the shelter has no air
pump. it is impractical to use screens that obstruct the
free movement ofvital air- except in cold weather.
The fly population would explode after a nuclear
attack. Radiation doses several times larger than doses
that would kill people do not sterilize insects. In
extensive rural areas where almost all people could
have adequate shelter to be safe from fallout. most
domestic animals and wild creatures would be killed.
Trillions of flies would breed in the dead bodies.
If you have prudently kept a can of modern
fly bait in your survival supplies. a little
sprinkled on top of the plastic covering can kill
literally thousands of flies.
Shelter occupants should make every effort to
prevent flies from reaching disease-spreading human
wastes.
Ants. especially in the warmer parts ofthe country.
could drive people out of expedient shelters. The best
prevention isto try to find a shelter-building site that is
not near an ant nest. If shelter occupants are careful in
storing food and eating. ants arc less likely to becomea
problem.
Ticks and chiggers arc usually found on grass
and low bushes. To avoid carrying these pests into the
shelter. do not bring grass or dead leaves into your
shelter for bedding except in freezing weather. Cut
leafy branches high above the ground: few pests live
in tall vegetation.
PERSONAL POSSESSIONS
Toothbrushes are not boiled or otherwise dis-
infected after being used. because we all develop con-
siderable resistance to our own infective organisms.
For the same reason. each individual should have his
own personal drinking cup. bowl. and spoon. They
should be cleaned as well as possible and kept covered
when not in use.
PREVENTION OF SKIN DISEASES
In crowded shelters. especially during hot
weather. 