lyyetfreely in its hole when the removable partofthefront
end is screwed in place.
e. From a piece of thick truck-tire inner-tube rubber, cuta 2-in.-
wide strip 12-in. long. To make the 2-in.-wide rubber bumper (see
Figs. 15and 16),connectone end of this rubber strip to the center ofa
3/4-in.-wide side of the piston rod. Do not place any screwor staple in
the strip closer than 1 in. from the strip's forward edge, that may
repeatedly bump into the front end. Wrap and attach the strip quite
tightly around the piston rod next to the handle. (If you have only a
piece of passenger-car inner-tube rubber, then to make a 2-in.-wide
bumper use a 4-in.-wide strip of this thinner rubber folded double
lengthwise.)
7. Attaching the piston rod to the piston:
a. On the back of the 12 x 12-in. plywood piston, mark lines to
enableyou toattach the piston rod as pictured in Fig. 14.Note thatthe
lowersideofthe piston rod isexactly 5-1/2 in. above the lower edge of
the plywood of the piston, and that the center line of the piston rod
intersects the vertical center line of the plywood of the piston.
b. To the end of the piston rod (see Fig. 14)adhere and screw (or
adhere and nail ifyour piston rod is not oak) two piecesof nominal 1x
2-in. boardseach 3in. long. Eachofthesetwo small boardsand the end
of the piston rod are in contact with and securely connected to the
plywood piston, and form a perfect "T" at the end of the piston rod.
c. Connect the piston rod to the piston, best with epoxy (or
adhesive)and small screws. Make sure that:(1) the four piston sealing
stripsoverlap the piston's plywood in the directionofthe piston rod, (2)
the 1-3/4-in.-wide sides of the piston rod are parallel to the top and
bottom of the piston, and (3) the piston rod is perpendicular to the
piston. See Figs. 2 and 14.
d. Make and attach to the piston rod a 3-in.-long rubber bumper,
positioned close to the piston as shown in Fig. 2.
OPERATING THE PUMP
1. Check tosee thatthe four sheetmetal stripson the four sidesofthe
piston all makeeven contactwith the wallsofthe"cylinder"when the
piston is moved back and forth. If the piston does not slide back and
forth quite easily even when not lubricated, carefully bend a strip or
strips so that they press less against the "cylinder" walls. If while
someone is shining a flashlight through a valve opening in the other
end of the pump you observe that parts of a sheetmetal strip do not
make close contact with a "cylinder" wall, gently bend outward that
part of the strip.
2. Lubricate all four walls of the "cylinder", the sheetmetal strips
that slide against the walls, and the piston rod. Use a very thin
motor-breakin white lithium grease(not an ordinary bearing grease,
that is too sticky). Or use a thin oil. The pump should be lubricated
after no more than each 24 hours of use, and before being used again
after days of disuse. .
3. Install the pump at a height above the floor so that most of the
persons who are going to pump can push and pull with their hands
moving at about the same height that their elbows are when they are
standing. See Fig. 3for an exampleofa pump-supportingtable raised
to an efficient heightfor operators who are the height of the pumper
pictured. .
4. Tosave work and to minimize wearon the pump, usually operate
it with a length ofstroke a little shorter than the distance between its
two rubber bumpers. To save energy especially when pumping air
through a high resistance ventilation system, move the piston back
and forth by using mostly your leg and body muscles.
PROLONGED STORAGE
Wipe offall greaseand other lubricants ifyoudo not plan to use this
pump for months. All lubricants-especially those on wood-tend to
become gummy with time.
Keep your supply of pump lubricants taped to your pump.
