shelters should
be aware that many lack forced ventilation and that
the blowers and fans of most forced ventilation
systems would be stopped by loss of electric power
due to electromagnetic pulse effects or by other
effects of nuclear explosions on electrical systems. A
blast wave at an overpressure range as low as I psi
(144 pounds per square foot) would wreck most
shelter-ventilating fans. In 1987, no water or food
normally is stocked. A person who brought to a
public shelter 10large plastic trash bags and 10pillow
slips, to make 10 expedient water bags in which 60
gallons of water could be stored (as described in
Chapter 8), would help both himself and dozens of
other shelter occupants. If he hoped to share the
basement in a strange family's home, his chances of
being welcomed would be improved if he brought a
small homemade shelter-ventilating pump and other
survival items. The same small pump would be
impractical in a large public shelter. An Oak Ridge
National Laboratory study completed in 1978found
that if all citizens were to go to National Shelter
Survey (:\'55) shelters within one mile of their homes,
69CC of those who found space would be in shelters
rated for 1000 or more occupants.'? The average
number of shelter spaces in this largestclass of public
shelters was 3179. The prospect of living in an
unequipped shelter crowded with this many
unprepared people-each of whom would have only
10square feet of floor space--is a strong motivation
to work hard to build and equip a small, earth-
covered shelter.
DECIDING WHAT KIND OF SHELTER
TO BUILD OR USE
Before deciding what kind of shelter you and
your family should build or use, it isbest to read all of
this book. Your final decision should include
consideration of ways to provide life-support
equipment discussed in following chapters. At this
stage, however, the reader will find it helpful to
review important reasons why different types of
shelters offer the best hope of survival to different
people, in different areas, and under different
conditions.
This book is written primarily to improve the
survival chances of people who cannot or do not
build permanent shelters. The information which
follows will help you select the best expedient or
available shelter for your family.
SHELTER NEAR OR IN YOUR HOME
If your 'home is 10 or more miles from an
average target such as a major airport with long
runways, or is20or more miles from a great city with
several strategic targets, you are fortunate: you can
prudently build or use a shelter close to home. No
one can foretell accurately which way the winds will
blow or where weapons will explode, so, if practical,
you should build a shelterthat gives better protection
against fallout, blast, and fire than shelters in build-
ings. Most people living outside targeted areas could
build such a shelter in two days or less, using one of
the designs of earth-covered expedient shelters
detailed in Appendix A.
Even if you plan to evacuate, you should decide
where you would take shelternearby incase you were
unable to do so. There is always a chance that an
attack may be launched without warning, giving
insufficient time to evacuate. Or the missile aimed at
the area in which you live may miss its target. If your
targeted home area were not hit, moderately heavy
fallout might be the only danger; even an improved
basement shelter would be adequate in that case.
EARTH-COVERED EXPEDIENT
FAMILY SHELTERS
Advantages of earth-covered, expedient family
shelters:
• Better protection against heavy fallout, blast,
and fire than afforded by the great majority of
shelters in buildings.
• The possibility of building in favorable
locations, including places far removed from target
areas, and places where it is impractical to build or to
improve large group-shelters giving good protection.• The opportunity for men, women, and
children to work together to providegood protection
in minimum time.
• A better chance to benefit from thoughtful
preparations made in advance than would be the case
in public shelters where water, food, etc. must be
shared.
• Less risk of personality clashes, hysteria under
stress, exposure to infectious diseases, and other
problems that arise when strangers are crowded
together for days or weeks.
