 charge ofseveral thousand volts on the tape.)
a. Adjust the charging-wire so that its lowerend is about 1/16 inch above the
upper edges ofthe aluminum-foil leaves. Use the sticky-tape at the end of
one adjustment-thread to hold the charging-wire in this position. Stick this
tape approximately in line with the leaves, either on the side of the can or
on the plastic cover. (If the plastic cover is w~ak. it may be necessary to
put a piece ofsticky-tape on the end ofeach adjustment-thread. in order to
hold the charging-wire securely. Ifa charging-wire is not secure. its lower
end may be forced up by the likecharge on the leaves before the leaves can
be fully charged.)
e.
f.
g.
h.
L
2.
2'-.,... THREADS
IENOSIlIOT $HOWtII1",,,,sc.t.L[
L-INSlOE OlA" ~'t,.... ---------J
iltVsaot UNO
~ ~
,>-,,..
J-~l '~~,'/r g"''''KEF ~
, ~ r- ~~
I ~L -
d. Fold the square of paper in the
middle, and movethe hard plastic
rapidly back and forth so that it
isrubbed vigorously on the paper
inthe middle ofthisfolded square
-whilethe outsideofthis folded
square of paperissqueezed firmly
betweenthumbandlittlefinger
on one side, and the ends of
three fingers on the other, To
avoid discharging the charge on
the plastic to the fingers, keep
th,:>t'Y'I '),\1.1'.::1" frf'\rY'I thp pAope {"\fthp
Charging a KFM with Hard Plastic Rubbed on Dry Paper.
a. Adjust the charging-wire so
that its lower end is about
1/16 inch above the upper
edges of the aluminum-foil r-
leaves. Use the sticky-tape ;
at the end of one adjust-
ment-thread to hold the
charging-wire in this
position. Stick this tape
approximately in line with
the threads suspending the
leaves, either on the side of
the can or on top of the
plastic cover. (If the
charging-wire is held loose-
ly by the cover, it may be
necessary to put a piece of
sticky-tape on the end of each adjustment-thread in order to adjust the
charging-wire securely. Ifa charging-wire is not secure. its lower end may
be forced up by the like charge on the leaves before the leaves can be fully
charged.)
b. Select a piece of Plexiglas. a draftsman's plastic triangle, a smooth plastic
ruler, or other piece of hard. smooth plastic. (Unfortunately. not all types
of hard plastic can be used to generate a sufficient electrostatic charge.)
Be sure the plastic is dry.
For charging a KFM (especially inside a dry-bucket). cut a
rectangularpieceofhard plastic suchas Plexiglas about 1-1/2by
6 inches. Sharp corners and edges should be smoothed. To avoid,
contaminating the charging end with sweaty, oily fingers, it is
best to mark the other end with a piece of tape, and to hold it only
by its taped end.
c. Fold DRY paper (a piece of clean paper bag, or other smooth,
clean paper) to make an approximate square about 5 inches on a
side and 15 to 20 sheets thick. (This many sheets of paper lessens
leakage to the fingers ofthe electrostatic high-voltage charges to
be generated on the hard plastic and on the rubbed paper.)
1.Ico
0)
o,
Ico
C)
o,"GET SET" POSITION
b. The sketch shows the "GET
SET" position. preparatory to
unrolling the Scotch Magic
Transparent Tape. P.V.c. elec-
trical tape, or other tape. Be
sure tofirst remove the roll from
its dispenser. Some of the other
kinds of tape will not produce a
high enough voltage.
c. QUICKLY unroll 10to 12inches
of tape by pulling its end with
the left hand. while the right
hand allows the roll to unwind
while remaining in about the
same "GET SET" position only
.an inch or two away from the
KFM.
d. 