 modern H-bombs are over
1000times as powerful as the A-bomb that destroyed
most of Hiroshima, these H-bombs are 1000times as
deadly and destructive.
• Facts: A nuclear weapon 1000times as powerful
as the one that blasted Hiroshima, if exploded under
comparable conditions, produces equally serious
blast damage to wood-frame houses over an area upto about 130times as large, not 1000times as large. For
example, air bursting a 20-kiloton weapon at
the optimum height to destroy most buildings
will destroy or severely damage houses out to
about 1.42milesfrom ground zero."The circular
area of at least severe blast damage will be
about 6.33 square miles. (The explosion of a 20
kiloton weapon releases the same amount of
energy as 20 thousand tons of TNT.) One thou-
sand 20-kiloton weapons thus air burst, well
separated to avoid overlap of their blast areas,
would destroy or severely damage houses over
areastotalingapproximately6,330 squaremiles.
In contrast, similar air bursting of one 20-
megatonweapon(equivalentinexplosivepower
to 20 million tons of TNT) would destroy or
severely damage the great majority of houses
out to a distance of 16 miles from ground zero.s
The area of destruction would be about 800
square miles - not 6,330 square miles.
Today few if any of Russia's huge inter-
continentalballisticmissiles(ICBMs) are armed
witha 20-megatonwarhead. Nowa huge Russian
ICBM, the SS-18,typically carries 10 warheads,
each having a yield of 500 kilotons, each pro-
grammed to hit a separate target. See Jane's
Weapon Systems, 1987-88.
• Myth:A RussiannuclearattackontheUnited
States would completely destroy all American
cities.
• Facts: As longas Sovietleaders are rational
they willcontinueto givefirst prioritytoknock-
ing out our weapons and other military assets
that can damage Russia and kill Russians. To
explode enough nuclear weapons of any size to
completely destroy American cities would be
an irrational waste of warheads. The Soviets
can make much better use of most of the war-
. heads that would be required to completely
destroy American cities; the majority of those
warheadsprobablyalreadyaretargetedto knock
out our retaliatory missiles by being surface
burst or near-surface burst on their hardened
silos, located far from most cities and densely
populated areas.
Unfortunately, many militarily significant
targets - including naval vessels in port and
port facilities, bombers and fighters on the
ground, air base and airport facilities that can
be used by bombers, Army installations, and
key defense factories - are in or close to
American cities. Inthe eventof an all-outSoviet
attack, most of these "soft" targets would be
destroyed by air bursts. Air bursting (see Fig.
1.4) a given weapon subjects about twice as
large an area to blast effects severe enough to
destroy "soft" targets as does surface bursting
(see Fig. 1.1) the same weapon. Fortunately for
Americans living outside blast and fire areas,
air bursts produce only very tiny particles.
Mostof theseextremelysmallradioactiveparti-
cles remain airborne for so long that their
radioactive decay and wide dispersal before
reaching the ground make them much less life-
endangeringthanthe promptlydepositedlarger
fallout particles from surface and near-surface
bursts. However, if you are a survival minded
American you should prepare to survive heavy
fallout wherever you are. Unpredictable winds
may bring fallout from unexpected directions.
Or your area may be in a "hot spot" of life-
endangering fallout caused by a rain-out or
snow-out of both small and tiny particles from
distant explosions. Or the enemy may use sur-
face or near-surface bursts in your part of the
country to crater long runways or otherwise
disrupt U.S. retaliatory actions by producing
heavy local fallout.
Today few if any of Russia's largest inter-continentalballisticmissiles (ICBMs) arearmed
with a 20-megaton warhead. A huge Russian
ICBM, the SS-18, typically carries 10 warheadseach having a yield of 500 kilotons, each pro-
grammed to hit a separate target. See Jane's
Weapon Systems, 1987-1988. 