 data furnished by Temet Oy for its
centrifugal blower when cranked by two men. I bave converted
Temet Oy's metric units into the common American units.
InTable 1the pressure difference of 4.3 inches water gauge is the
resistance to airflow that Temet Oy realistically gives as typical of a
well designed shelter ventilation system of pipes, valves and blower
plus a Chemical Biological Radiological (CBR) filter. Temet Oygives
2.0 inches water gauge as typical of the same ventilation system
with only a low resistance dust filter. The much larger volume
pumped by the Double-Action Piston Pump when a CBR filter is
PERFORMANCE TESTS
The volumetric and durability tests summarized below are proof
that this homemade Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump is better
than most hand-cranked centrifugal blowers for supplying a shelter
with outdoor air through typical air-intake and exhaust pipes-
especially when the ventilation system contains a filter and/or blast
valves. The filters that give the best protection, Chemical Biological
Radiological (CBR) Filters, have quite high resistance to airflow, as
docommercial blastvalves thatclosequicklyenough to protectfilters,
1. Volumetric tests, Because the rapidly pulsating airflows into
and outofa piston pumpare very hard to measure accurately with an
air velocity meter, I made an inflatablecylindrical bagof2-mil(0.002
inch) polyethylene film; the fully inflated volume of this bag was 256
cubic feet. The bag was suspended on a horizontal strong cord
running through its length. A short tube 62 inches in circumference
connected the back end of the pump (that is opposite the operator's
end) to the suspended bag. Bag and pump were in a below ground
shelter that normally has essentially motionless air. See Fig. 1.
Since this type of pump exhausts equal volumes of air from each of
its two ends, the total cubic feet per minute(cfm) that it pumpsequals
twice the cfm that itexhausts into the shelterfrom oneofits ends. See
Fig. 1.that shows the pumpattached with "C"clampsto a small steel
table and being used to pump air into the 256 cubic foot suspended
bag.
I measured the pressure differences against which the pump was
operated. In a shelter these differences typically are caused by the
resistance toairflow in pipes, valves, and a filter. I measured pressure
differences in inches water gauge (l in. w.g. = 0.036 psi) with the
small-tube manometer attached to the side of the pump. To produce
various pressure differences for several tests, I nailed a piece of
plywood over the top of the air-intake duct, so as to produce different
sized openings; in most tests I placed different layers of filter:
materials in a filter box that was fitted airtight over-the 6 x 6-in.
air-supplyductonthe top ofthe pump. See Fig.3.(Thislow-resistance
filter removes practicallyall fallout particlesof wartimeconcern,and
also most infective aerosols that may be used in biological warfare.
See "Making and Using a Homemade Filter Box and Filter", by
Cresson H. Kearny, October 1985.2. Durability tests. Findinga homemakeable method toseal the
moving piston so as to assure at least one month of continuous
efficient pumping was the mostdifficult problem. Various rubber
seals attached to the edges of the piston were unsatisfactory. and
aluminum sheetmetal strips (shaped and attached like the gal-
vanized steel sheetmetal strips used in this model) wore out in less
than a week. even when oiled every 24 hours.
To save money during weeks of continuous durability testing,
the pump was operated by an electric motor that powered a pulley
drive that turned a 2-foot-diameter pulley having an attached
40-in.-Iongsteel pitman with a hinged connection to a horizontally-
sliding bar connected to the handle of the pump's wooden piston
rod. See Fig. 4.
F'ig'. 4. Mechanized Drive Used in Weeks-Long- Durability Tests.
After pumping- for :380 hours (15.8:3 days) at 44 strokes per
minute ag-ainst a pressure differenceof 2.:3in. w.g., the worst worn
spot on any of the 30-gauge steel sheetmetal sealing- strips on the
piston was reduced in thickness from its original 0.0155 in. 