 tablecloths, plasticmattresscovers, or
the like)-essential in rainy, cold weather.
• Materials for building a ventilating
pump, a KAP 20 in. wide and 26 in. high.
(See Appendix B.)
• Containers for storing 15 gallons of
water per occupant. (See Chapter 8.)
B. Useful Tools and Materials
• Additional saws, axes, hatchets, shovels,
and large buckets or cans.• A chain saw-if there is a person in the
group who is skilled at operating one.
• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil-to keep a
handsaw from sticking in green, gummy
wood.
• A measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler.
• One bedsheet for each person to be
sheltered, or a piece ofstrongfabric or plastic
of about the same size.
• A total of 40 square yards of rainproof-
ing materials for the illustrated 5-person
shelter and 31'2 square yards for each
additional person. (Even thin plastic will
serve for the "buried roof.")
5. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP.
6. Wear gloves from the start-even tough hands
can blister after hours of digging and chopping
and can become painful and infected.
7. Select a shelter location where there is little
chance of the ground being covered with waterif
it rains hard. (Ifyou are sure the water table will
not rise to cover the floor of a shallow
excavation, you can save work by first lowering
the area of the planned main room by a foot or
two. After the shelter is roofed, the excavated
earth can be shoveled back to help cover the
completed pole roof.) To avoid the extra work of
cutting roots when excavatingearth, select a site
at least as far away from a tree as the tree istall.
8. For ashelter that is completely aboveground,
clear grass. weeds, etc. from the area where the
shelter is to be built. (This reduces the possible
problem of chiggers, ticks, etc.) Do not remove
any earth at this stage.
9. Stake out the entire shelter. Check the square-
ness of the shelter room by making its diagonals
equal. Then drive two lines of stakes to mark the
outside edges of the completed earth covering.
Place these stakes 4ft outside the future positions
of the lower ends of the roof poles.
10. Check the squareness of the future floor area
inside the two lines marking where the
two V-shaped, 4-in.-deep trenches will be dug,
to secure the lower ends of the sloping side-poles
of the room. These two parallel lines are 14ft 6
in. apart. When the two diagonals joining the
ends of these two parallel lines are equal in
length, the area between them has square
corners.
II. While some persons are staking out the shelters,
others should be cutting green poles and hauling
them to the site. Cut poles that have tops with
diameters (excluding bark) no smaller than the
diameters specified on the illustration for each
type of pole.
12. To make the hauling and handling of the longer
poles easier, select poles with top diameters no
more than 50% larger than the specified
minimum diameters.
13. Sort the poles by length and diameter and lay all
poles of each size together, near the excavation.
14. AS SOON AS POLES ARE BROUGHT TO
THE SITE, SOME WORKERS SHOULD
.START BUILDING THE FOUR LADDER-
LIKE HORIZONTAL BRACES FOR THE
ENTRYWAYS-TO AVOID DELAYS LAT-
ER. Study the drawing. Then construct these
braces on smooth ground near the excavation.
Place two straight poles, each 8 ft long (with
small-end diameters of 31/2 in.), on smooth
ground, paralleland so that theiroutersides are 3
ft apart. Hold these poles securely so that their
outer sides are exactly 3 ft apart, by driving two
pairs of stakes into the ground so that they just
touch the outsides of the two long poles. Each of
the four stakes should be located about one foot
from the end of a pole. To keep the 8-ft poles
from being rotated duringthe next step, nail two
boards or small poles across them perpen-
dicularly, as temporary braces, about 4 ft apart.
