 be preferred, eithersprinkled
on food or dissolved in water.
One good expedient way to prevent or cure scurvy
is to eat sprouted seeds - not just the sprouts.
Sprouted beans prevented scurvy during a famine in
India. Captain James Cook wasable to keep hissailors
from developing scurvy during a three-year voyage by
having them drink an unfermented beer made from
dried, sprouted barley. For centuries the Chinese have
prevented scurvy during the long winters of northern
China by consuming sprouted beans.
Only IO mg of vitamin C taken each day (1/5 of
the smallest vitamin C tablet) is enough to prevent
scurvy. Ifa little over an ounce (about 30grams) of dry
beans or dry wheat is sprouted until the sprouts are a
little longer than the seeds, the sprouted seeds will
supply 10 to 15 mg of vitamin C. Such sprouting, if
done at normal room temperature, requires about 48
hours. To preventsickness and to make sprouted beans
more digestible, the sprouted seeds should be boiled in
water for not longer than 2 minutes. Longer cooking
willdestroy too much vitamin C.
Usual sprouting methods produce longer sprouts
than are necessary when production ofenough vitamin
C is the objective. These methods involve rinsing the
sprouting seeds several times a day in safe water. Since
even survivors not confined to shelters are likely to be
short of water, the method illustrated in Fig. 9.5should
be used. First the seeds to be sprouted are picked clean
of trash and broken seeds. Then the seeds are covered
with water and soaked for about 12hours. Next, the
water is drained off and the soaked, swollen seeds are
placed on the inside of a plastic bag or ajar, in a layer
no more than an inch deep. Ifa plastic bag isused, you
should make two loose rolls of paper, crumple them a
little, dampen them, and place them inside the bag,
along its sides. As shown in Fig. 9.5, these two
dampened paper rolls keep the plastic from resting on
the seeds and form an air passage down the center of
the bag. Wetpapershould beplaced inthe mouth ofthe
bag or jar so as to leave an air opening of only about I
square inch. If this paper is kept moist, the seeds will
remain sufficientlydampwhilereceivingenoughcircula-
tingair to prevent molding. They willsproutsufficiently
after about 48 hours at normal room temperature.Fig. 9.5. Sprouting with minimum water.
Sprouting seeds also increases their content
of riboflavin, niacin, and folic acid. Sprouted beans
are more digestible than raw, urisprouted beans, but
not as easily digested or nourishing as are sprouted
beans that have been boiled or sauteed for a couple
of minutes. Sprouting is not a substitute for cooking.
Contrary to the claims of some health food publi-
cations, sprouting does not increase the protein
content of seeds, nor does it improve protein quality.
Furthermore, sprouting reduces the caloric value of
seeds. The warmth generated by germinating seeds
reduces their energy value somewhat, as compared
to unsprouted seeds.
• Vitamin A
Well-nourished adults have enough vitamin A
stored in their livers to prevent vitamin A deficiency
problems for several months, even if theirdiet during
that time contains none of this' essential vitamin.
Children would be affected by deficiencies sooner
than adults. The first symptom is an inability to see
well in dim light. Continuing deficiency causes
changes in body tissues. In infants and children,
lack of vitamin A can result in stunted growth and
serious eye problems-even blindness. Therefore, a
survival diet should be balanced with respect to
vitamin A as soon as possible, with children having
priority.
Milk, butter, and margarine are common
vitamin A sources that would not be available to
most survivors. If these were no longer available,
yellow corn, carrots, and green, leafy vegetables
(including dandelion greens) would be the best
sources. If these foods were not obtainable, the next
best source would be sprouted whole-kernel wheat
or other grains-if seeds could be sprouted for three
days in the light, so that the sprouts are green.
Although better than no source, sprouting is not
a very satisfactory way to meet vitamin A require-
ments. 