 the frame and make the
flaps of thinner material, such as the polyethylene of
large plastic trash bags. For pumps 24 inches or less
in height, make the finished flaps only 31/2 inches
wide and space their pivot-wires 3 inches apart. The
flaps should overlap no more than 1/2 inch. A KAP 24
inches high will pump enough outdoor air for only a
few people, except in cold weather.
Small, yetefficient KAPs can be madeeven ifthe
only materials available are straight sticks about 11/4
inches in diameter, strips of cloth to tie the frame
together and to make the hinges and the pull cord,
polyethylene film from large trash bags for the flaps,
freezer or duct tape (or needle and thread) to make
the flap hems, coat hanger wire or stringfor the pivot-
wire, and string or ordinary thread for the flap-stops.
A sharp knife is the only essential tool. Figure 21
shows a way to easily tie sticks securely together and
to attach strings or threadsfor stop-flaps, when small
nails and tacks are not available. The flap-stop
strings or threads should be secured by wrapping
them several times around each stick to which they
are attached, so they willbe gripped by the out-of-line
knife cuts.
ORNL-DWG 78-21897
"U" NOTCH
GROOVE
(ONLY ON UPPER SIDE)
STOP·FLAP
MADE OF STRING
OR 4 THREADS
KNIFE CUTS
TO SECURE
FLAp·STOPS
Fig. 21. Sticks ready to be tied togetherto make
a KAP frame.VIII. LARGE KAPs
A. Construction
A 6-ft-high by 29-in.-wide model can be
constructed in the same way as a 3-ft model-except
that it should have both horizontal and vertical
center braces (I X 2-in. boards are best). To increase
the strength of a 6-ft KAP, all parts of its double-
thickness frame and its vertical center brace should
be made of two thicknesses of I X 2-in. softwood
boards, securely held together with clinched nails.
Also, to increase the distance that the pump will
swing back by itself during its return stroke, it is
worthwhile to attach a 6-ft piece of 1 X 2-in. board
(not illustrated) to the back of each side of the frame.
Do NOT attach weights to the bottom of the frame;
this would slow down the pumping rate.
This 6-ft-high pump requires 18flaps, each the
same size as those of the 36-in.-high KAP. The flaps
on the lower part ofa large KAP must withstand hard
use. If I 2-in.-wide strips of tape are attached along
the bottom and side edges of these lower flaps, then
even flaps made of ordinary 4-mil polyethylene will
remain serviceable for over 1000hours of pumping.
However, the lower flaps of large KAPs can
advantageously be made of 6-mil polyethylene. The
width and spacing of all flaps should be the same as
those of the 36-in.-high model.
The pull-cord should be attached to the vertical
center brace of a 6-ft KAP about 161/2in. below the
hinge line. A 3; 16-in. nylon cord is ideal.
To adequately ventilate and cool very large and
crowded shelters in buildings, mines, or caves, KAPs
larger than 72 X 29 in. should be used. You can take
better advantage of large doorways, elevator shaft
openings, etc., by "tailor-making" each large air-
supply KAP to the size of its opening-that is, by
making it as large as ispractical. The frame and brace
members should be appropriately strengthened, and
one or more "Y" bridles should be provided, as
described in the section below. A 7-ft-high X 51/2-ft-
wide KAP, with a 1!4-in.-diameter pull-cord attached
18 in. below its hinge line, and with two "Y" bridles
for its two operators, pumped air at the rate of over
11,000 cubic ft per minute through a large basement
shelter during tests.
To make a durable connection of the pull-cord
to the center vertical brace: (I) Attach a wire loop
(Fig. 