 on their
behalf. Our huge stocks of unprocessed foods, which
could prevent the majority of unprepared survivors
from dying of hunger, would not be suitable for the
very young. They need foods that are more con-
centrated and less rough. Most American mothers do
not nurse their infants, and if a family's supply of
baby foods were exhausted the parents might ex-
perience the agony of seeing their baby slowly
starve.
Few Americans have watched babies starving.
In China, I saw anguish on starving mothers' faces
as they patted and squeezed their flat breasts, trying
to get a little more milk into their weak babies'
mouths. Isaw this unforgettable tragedy in the midst
of tens of thousands of Chinese evacuating on foot
before a ruthless Japanese army during World
War II. Years later, my wife and I stored severalhundred pounds of milk powder while our five
children were small. I believe that parents who fear
the use of nuclear weapons will be glad to bear the
small expense of keeping on hand the emergency
baby foods listed in Table 9.4, below. (More de-
tailed descriptions of these and many other foods,
with instructions for their use, are given in an Oak
Ridge National Laboratory report, Maintaining
Nutritional Adequacy During A Prolonged Food
Crisis, ORNL-5352, 1979. This report may be
purchased for $6.50 from National Technical In-
formation Service, U.S. Department of Commerce,
5385 Port Royal Road, Springfield, Virginia 22161.)
To make a formula adequate for a 24-hour
period, the quantities of instant non-fat dry milk,
vegetable cooking oil, and sugar listed in the "Per
Day" column of Table 9.4 should be added to 4 cups
of safe water. This formula can be prepared daily in
cool weather or when a refrigerator is available.
In warm or hot weather, or under unsanitary con-
ditions, it is safer to make a formula 3 times a day.
To do so, add ]/3 cup plus 2 teaspoons (a little less
than one ounce) of instant non-fat milk powder
to I]) cups (3 pint) of boiled water, and stir
thoroughly. Then add 1tablespoon (about ]/3 ounce,
or 9 grams) of vegetable oil and 2 teaspoons of sugar,
and stir. (If regular bakers' milk powder is used, ]/4
cup is enough when making one-third -of the daily
formula, 3 times a day.) If baby bottles are not at
hand. milk can be spoon-fed to an infant.
Especially during a war crisis, the best and
most dependable food for an infant is mother's
milk--provided the mother is assured an adequate
diet. The possibility of disaster is one more reason
why a mother should nurse her baby for a full year.
Storing additional high-protein foods and fats for
a nursing mother usually will be better insurance
against her infant getting sick or starving than
keeping adequate stocks of baby foods and the
equipment necessary for sanitary feeding after
evacuation or an attack.
To give a daily vitamin supplement to a baby, a
multivitamin pill should be crushed to a fine powder
between two spoons and dissolved in a small amount
of fluid, so that the baby can easily swallow it. If an
infant does not receive adequate amounts of vitamins
A, D, and C, he will develop deficiency symptoms
in I to 3 months, depending on the amounts stored
in his body. Vitamin C deficiency, the first to appear,
can be.prevented by giving an infant 15 mg of
vitamin C each day (about ]/3 of a 50-mg vitamin C
tablet, pulverized) or customary foods containing
vitamin C, such as orange juice. Lacking these
sources, the juice squeezed from sprouted grains
or legumes can be used. If no vitamin pills or foods
rich in vitamin D are available, exposure of the
baby's skin to sunlight will cause his bodyto produce
vitamin D. It would be wise to wait about 30 days
after an attack before exposing the baby to sunlight.
After that, short exposures would be safe except
in areas of extremely heavy fallout. As a further
precaution, the baby can be placed in an open,
shallow pit that will provide shielding from radiation
given off by fallout particles on the ground. Initial
exposure should be very short, no more than
10 minutes.
If sufficient milk is not obtainable, even infants
younger than six months should be given solid food.
