 Sovietattack,
and therefore should motivate our Government
both to deploy truly defensive Star Wars wea-
pons andto buildblastshelters to protecturban
Americans.
NuclearweaponsthatcouldstriketheUnited
States continue to increase in accuracy as well
as numbers;themostmodernwarheadsusually
can hitwithina few hundredfeet of theirprecise
targets. The Soviet Union already has enough
warheadsto targetallmilitarilyimportantfixed-
site objectives. These include our fixed-site
weapons,commandandcontrolcenters, military
installations, oil refineries and other industrial
plants' that produce war essentials, long run-
ways, and major electric generating plants.
Many of these are either in or near cities.
Because most Americans live in cities that
contain strategically important targets, urban
Americans' best chance of surviving a heavy
nuclear attack is to get out of cities during a
worsening crisis and into fallout shelters away
from probable targets.
Most American civil defense advocates be-
lieve that it would be desirable for our Govern-
mentto buildandstockpermanentblastshelters.
However, such permanent shelters would cost
many tens of billions of dollars and are not
likely to be undertaken as a national objective.
Therefore, field-tested instructions and plans
are needed to enable both urban evacuees and
ruralAmericanstobuildexpedientsheltersand
life-support equipment during a crisis.
SMALLER NUCLEAR ATTACKS
ON AMERICA
Many strategists believe that the United
Statesis morelikelyto suffera relatively small
nuclearattackthanan all-outSovietonslaught.
Thesepossiblesmallernuclearattacksinclude:
• A limited Soviet attack that might result if
Russia'srulersweretoconcludethat an Ameri-
can President would be likely to capitulate
rather than retaliate if a partially disarming
first strike knocked out most of our fixed-site
and retaliatory weapons, but spared the great
majority of our cities. Then tens of millions of
people livingawayfrom missile silosand Stra-
tegic Air Force bases would need only fallout
protection. Even Americans who live in large
metropolitan areas and doubt that they could
successfully evacuate during a nuclear crisis
should realizethatintheeventof sucha limited
attack they would have great need for nuclear
war survival skills.
• An accidental or unauthorized launching of
one or several nuclear weapons that would
explode on America. Complex computerized
weapon systems and/or their human operators
are capable of making lethal errors.
• A small attack on the United States by the
fanatical ruler of an unstable country that may
acquire small nuclear weapons and a pr.imitive
delivery system.
• A terrorist attack, that will be a more likely
possibilityoncenuclearweaponsbecomeavail-
able in unstable nations. Fallout dangers could
extend clear across America. For example, a
singlesmall nuclearweaponexplodedin a West
Coast city would cause lethalfallout hazards to
unshelteredpersonsforseveralmilesdownwind
from the part of the citydevastatedby blast and
fire. It also would result in deposition of fallout
in downwind localities up to hundreds of miles
away, with radiation dose rates hundreds of
timeshigherthanthenormalbackground. Fall-
out would be especially heavy in areas of rain-
out; pregnant women and small children in
those areas, following peacetime standards for
radiation protection, might need to stay shel-
tered for weeks. Furthermore, in localities
spotted across the United States, milk would be
contaminated by radioiodine.
Surely in future years nuclear survival
know-how will become an increasingly impor-
tant part of every prudent person's education.WHY THIS 1987 EDITION?
This updated and augmented edition is
needed to give you:
• Information on how changes since 1979 in
the Soviet nuclear arsenal - especially the
great reductions in the sizes of Russian war-
heads and increases intheir accuracy andnum-
ber - both decrease and increase the dangers
we all face. You need this information to make
logical decisions regarding essentials of your
survival planning, including whether you
should evacuate during a worsening crisis or
buildorimproviseshelteratornearyourhome.
• Instructions for making and using self-help
survival items that have been re-discovered,
invented or improved since 1979. 