 pot of food being placed in
an expedient Fireless Cooker.
overnight. Whole beans should be boiled for 10 to
15 minutes before they are placed in a Fireless
Cooker.
COOKING GRAIN AND BEANS WHEN
SHORT OF FUEL OR POTS
• Cooking Grain Alone
When whole grains are pounded or ground by
expedient means, the result usually is a mixture of
coarse meal, fine meal, and a little flour. Under
shelter conditions, the best way to cook such meal
is first to bring the water to a boil (3 parts of water
for I part of meal). Add 1teaspoon (5 grams) of salt
per pound of dry meal. Remove the pot from the fire
(or stop adding fuel to a Bucket Stove) and quickly
stir the meal into the hot water. (Ifthe meal isstirred
into briskly boiling water, lumping becomes a worse
problem.) Then, while stirring constantly, again
bring the pot to a rolling boil. Since the meal isjust
beginning to swell, more unabsorbed water remains,
so there is lesssticking and scorching than ifthe meal
were added to cold water and then brought to
a boil.If any type of Fireless Cooker is available, the
hot cereal only has to be boiled and stirred long
enough so that no thin, watery part remains. This
usually takes about 5 minutes. Continue to cook,
either in the Fireless Cooker for at least 4 or 5 hours,
or by boiling for an additional 15 or 20 minutes.
When it is necessary to boil grain meal for many
minutes, minimize sticking and scorching by cook-
ing I part of dry meal with at least 4 parts of water.
However. cooking a thinner hot cereal has a dis-
advantage during a food crisis: an increased volume
of food must be eaten to satisfy one's energy
needs.
If grain were the only food available, few
Americans doing physical work could eat enough
of it to maintain their weight at first, until their
digestive tracts enlarged from eating the very bulky
foods. This adaptation could take a few months.
Small children could not adjust adequately to an
all-grain diet: for them, concentrated foods such as
fats also are needed to provide enough calories to
maintain growth and health.
• Cooking Grain and Beans Together
When soybeans are being used to supplement the
lower quality proteins of grain and when fuel or pots
are inshort supply, first grind or pound the beans into a
fine meal. To further reduce cooking time, soak the
bean meal for a couple ofhours, keeping itcovered with
wateras itswells. Next put the soaked bean meal into a
pot containing about 3 times as much water as the
combined volume of a mixture of 1 part of dry
bean meal and 3 or 4 parts of dry grain meal.
Gently boil the bean meal for about 15minutes, stirring
frequently. before adding the grain meal and
completing the cooking.
Stop boiling and add the grain meal while stirring
constantly. Again bring the pot to a boil, stirring to
prevent sticking and scorching, and boil until the meal
has swelled enough to have absorbed all the water.
After salting. boil the grain-bean mush for another 15
minutes or more before eating, or put it in a fireless
cooker for at least 4 or 5 hours.
Soybeans boiled alone have a taste that most
people find objectionable. Also, whole soybeans must
be boiled for a couple of hours to soften them
sufficiently. But if soybeans are pounded or ground
into a fine meal, and then 1partof the soybeanmeal
is boiled with 4 parts of meal made from corn or
another grain, the soybeans give a pleasant
sweetish taste to the resulting mush. The un-
pleasant soybean taste is eliminated. If cooked as
described above, soybeans and other beans or dried
peas can be made digestible and palatable with mini-
mum cooking.
100% GRAIN AND 100% BEAN DIETS
A diet consisting solely of wheat, corn, or rice,
and salt has most of the essential nutrients. The
critical deficiencies would be vitamins A, C, and D.
Such a grain-based diet can serve adults and older
children as their "staff of life" for months. Table 9.1
shows how less than 13(4 pounds of whole wheat
or dry yellow corn satisfies most of the essential
nutritional requirements of a long-term emergency
ration. 