 my milk powder was still
good ~ as good as it would have been if stored in a
normally air-conditioned and heated home for about 3
years.
• Do not place stored metal containers directly on the
floor. To avoid possible condensation of moisture and
the rusting that results, place containers on spaced
boards. For long-term storage in damp permanent
shelters or damp basements, use solid-plasticcontainers
with thick walls.
• Rotate stored foods. Eat the oldest food of each type
and replace it with fresh food. Althoughcookingoiland
non-fat milk powder remain edible after several years of
storage at room temperature, these and most other dry
foods are more nourishing and taste better if stored for
no more than 2years. Most canned foods taste better if
kept no more thanone year. Exceptionsare whole grains
and white sugar, which stay good for decades if stored
properly.
• Storeplentyofsalt.Inourmodernworldsaltis
so abundant and cheap that most Americans do
not realize that in many areas soon after a major
nuclear attack salt would become a hard-to-get
essentialnutrient.Personsworkinghardwithout
salt would suffer cramps and feel exhausted
within a few days. Most famine relief shipments
ofgrainprobablywouldnotincludesalt.Sostore
enough salt both to salt your family's food for
months and to trade for other necessities.
SEEDS
For thousands of years storing seeds has
been an essential part of the survival prepara-
tionsmadebymillionsofprudentpeoplefearing
attack. Seeds are hopes for future food and the
defeat of famine, that lethal follower of disas-
trous wars.
Among the most impressive sounds I ever
heard were faint, distant rattles of small stones,
heard on a quiet, black, freezing night in 1944.
An air raid was expected before dawn. I was
standing on one of the bare hills outside
Kunming, China,tryingtopinpointthe sources
of lights that Japanese agents had used just
before previous air raids to guide attacking
bombers to blacked-out Kunming. Puzzled by
sounds of cautious digging starting at about
2:00 AM, I askedmy interpreterifhe knewwhat
was going on. He told me that farmers walked
most of the night to make sure that no one was
followingthem, andwere buryingsealedjarsof
seeds in secret places, far enough from homesso that probably no one would hear them dig-
ging. My interpreter did not need to tell me that
if the advancing Japanese troops succeeded in
taking Kunming they would ruthlessly strip
the surrounding countryside of all food they
could find. Then those prudent farmers would
have seeds and hope in a starving land.
If you doubt that enough of our current
"oversupply" of stored whole grains, soybeans,
milkpowder,etc. wouldreachyouaftera nuclear
attack, you should store seeds known to grow
well in your area.
Whengettingyoursupply of survivalseeds,
remember:
• Grains andbeans arethebestplantsources
of energy and protein.
• Even if you have enough vitamins for
several months, you may not be able to buy
more until long after a nuclear war.
• The deadly curses of scurvy, vitamin A
deficiencies, and pellagra can be prevented by
eating the plants, seeds, and sprouted seeds
described earlier in this chapter.
• Plants grownfrom hybridseeds givelarger
yields, but do not produce as productive seeds
as do plantsgrownfrom goodnon-hybrid seeds.
• Seeds of proven productivity in your lo-
calitymaybe morevaluablethanmoney after a
major nuclear attack.
• Youshouldgetand storemostlynon-hybrid
seeds, after learning from experienced local
gardeners which are best.Chapter 10
Fallout Radiation Meters
THE CRITICAL NEED
A survivor in a shelter that does not have a
dependable meter to measure fallout radiation-
or that has one but lacks someone who knows how to
useit-willfacea prolonged nightmareofuncertainties:
Human beings cannot feel, smell, taste, hear, or see
fallout radiation. A heavyattack would put most radio
stations offthe air, due to the effectsofelectromagnetic
pulse, blast, fire, or fallout from explosions. Because
fallout intensitiesoftenvarygreatlyovershortdistances,
those stationsstill broadcastingwould rarely beable to
give reliable information concerning the constantly
changingradiationdangersaround asurvivor'sshelter.
Which parts ofthe shelter givethe best protection?
