 the
CENTER MARK, but make the right corner
of each pleat about 1 inch higher than the
right corner of the preceding pleat. When the
pleat-folding is completed, the STARTING
CORNER and the other corner should be at
the same height (4 inches) above the
CENTER MARK.
7. Tie ·the hammock-supporting rope tightly
around the end of the .sheet about 3 inches
below the edge with the CENTER MARK.
(If a rope strong enough to support at least
the weight of two men is not available, make
an expedient "rope" by tearing a 16-inch-
wide strip from a sheet or other strong cloth
and then rolling this strip crosswise to its
length to make a tight roll several feet long.
Then tie string or small strips of clothabout I
inch wide around it, spaced 4 to 6 inches
apart, to keep the rolled-up cloth from
unrolling.)
8. Bend the pleat-folded end of the sheet
downward around the hammock rope, so
that the knot of the hammock rope is
uppermost.
9. To keep the sheet from being pulled through
the encircling hammock rope, bind the
doubled-over end of the sheet with cord (or
with narrow strips of cloth) about 1 inch
below the rope. Tie the binding cord at least
four times around, knotting it each time
around.
10. Repeat the procedure (4 through 9) with the
other end of the double-folded sheet, thus
producing a boat-shaped hammock with its
two sides each about 8 inches shorter than its
lengthwise center section.
OItHl-l1l"G77-l73'iO
TIE ROPE TIGHTLY
AROUND FOLDED
SHEET HERE, 3
INCHES BELOW THE
EDGE WITH THE
CENTER MARK
ORlll-OWe 77-17391How to hang the hammock:
1. To suspend a hammock from a strong
wooden roof such as the poles of a Pole-
Covered Trench Shelter, drive two strong
nails (at least 31/2 inches long) into the wood
at approximately 45° angles, crossing and
touching each other. Bind the two nails
together with wire. To prevent a hammock
rope from being rubbed directlyagainst fixed
metal, make a loose loop of strong wire (best
if doubled) through the crossed nails; tie the
hammock rope to this free-moving wire loop.
2. To suspend the hammock from a wooden
wall, use the same type of crossed-nails
supports, with the nails driven .in one above
the other.
3. For comfort and safety, hang the hammock
with the head end 18 inches higher than the
center and with the foot end 24 inches higher
than the center.
4. To make sure that the hammock is strong
enough, two persons should place their open
hands on its centerline and put all of their
weight on the hammock.
5. To suspend hammocks and hammock-chairs
from a pole roof that is not being built under
fear of immediate attack, use loops of strong
wire around the poles at the planned support
points. (The correct placement of wire loops
takes considerable time and delays comple-
tion of the shelter.) To reduce stresses and
possible breakage, the loops should be loose,
as illustrated.
ORNL-DWG 77-17394
ORNL·DWG 78-6321ATTACHMENT POINT
suspending ropes where each is tied to its
suspension point on the ceiling; also mark the
spot on each suspending rope for a chair arm
where each is tied to its suspension point on a
chair arm. Ifenough light rope or strong cord is
available, the easiest and quickest way to connect
and disconnect the arm supports is to suspend
each arm with a double strand of rope, looped
around an attachment point as illustrated by the
sketch of the attachment point.
'----- ATTACHMENT
POINT ON A
CHAIR "ARM"
ORNL DWG 77 -18432
»<":SUSPENDING
ROPES OF CHAIR
"ARMS"
ORNl-DWG 77-17395
•....----SUSPENSION
, POINT ON
~~CEILING
.".~O'
/ FOLDED EDGE
/
--------..