 I
Two men thus fanning vigorously produced a net air flow of 5,500 cubic
feet per minute through an empty school corridor that is 8 feet wide, has a 9-
foot ceiling. and is 194 feet long. The doors at both ends were open. To
adequately ventilate and cool people crowded into a long tunnel in hot
weather. a pair of Bedsheet Fanners should be positioned about every 100
feet along its length.
,-,~ [I]LLJSTARTING ~----
POSITIONChapter 7
Protection Against Fires and Carbon Monoxide
RELATIVE DANGERS
Fire and itsconsequences probably would be the
third-ranking danger to unprepared Americans
subjected to a massive nuclear attack. Direct blast
effects would be first, covering a large fraction of
densely populated areas and killing far more people.
Considerably fewer fatalities seem likely to result
from the second-ranking danger, fallout radiation.
THE FACTS ABOUT FIRE HAZARDS
Firestorms would endanger relatively few
Americans; only the older parts of a few American
cities have buildings close enough together, over a
large enough area, to fuel this type of conflagration.
Such fires have not occurred in cities where less than
about 30% of a large area was covered with
buildings."
In the blast area of Hiroshima, a terrifying fire
storm thatburned almost all buildings withinan area
of about 4.4 square miles resulted from many fires
being ignited almost simultaneously. Many were
caused by heat radiation from the fireball. Even more
fires were due to secondary effects of the blast, such
as the overturning of stoves. The buildingscontained
much wood and other combustible materials. The
whole area burned like a tremendous bonfire; strong
winds that blew in from all directions replaced the
huge volumes of hot air that rose skyward from the
intense fires.
Lack of oxygen is not a hazard to occupants of
shelters in or near burning buildings or to those in
shelters that are closed tightly to prevent the entry of
smoke or fallout. Carbon monoxide, toxic smoke
from fires, or high concentrations of carbon dioxide
from shelter occupants' exhaled breaths would kill
occupants before they suffered seriously from lack of
oxygen.
FIRES IGNITED BY HEAT RADIATION
Figure 7.1 shows a wood-frame house after it
was heated for one second by heat radiation from a
smallnuclearweaponexploded in a Nevada test. This
test house had no furnishings, but the heat was
intense enough to have ignited exposed upholstery,
curtains, bedding, papers, etc. in a typical home.
Heat radiation. will set fire to easily ignitable
materials (dry newspapers, thin dark fabrics, dry
leaves and dry grass) in about the same extensive
areas over which blast causes moderate damage to
frame houses. The blast wave and high-speed blast
winds will blowout many flames. However, tests
have shown that fire will continue to smolder within
some materials such as upholstery and dry rotted
.wood, and after a while it often will burst into flame
and will spread. The burning automobile pictured in
Fig. 7.2 is an example of such ignition beyond the
range of severe blast damage.
The number of fires started by heat radiation in
areas where blast is not severe can be reduced by
whitewashing the insides of window panes and by
removing flammable materials from places in and
around houses where heat radiation could reach
them. Also, occupants of shelters in some homes that
would be only slightly damaged by blast could move
quickly to extinguish small fires and throw out
smoldering upholstered articles before fallout is
deposited.Fig. 7.1. Heat radiation charred the paint on this house, which had been painted white to reflect heat rays.
The charring instantaneously produced the smoke. However, precautions had been taken to preventthis typical
U.S. house from being destroyed by fire, because the test was made to enable engineers to study the effects of
blast, rather than fire. The house wasdemolished by the 5-psi overpressure blast that struck seconds later, but it
did not burn.
Fig. 7.2. Thermal radiation from a nuclear explosion enteredthe carabove through itsclosed windows and
ignited the upholstery. The windows wereblown out bythe blast afewseconds later. However, the explosion was
at such a distance that the blast wave was not severe enough to dent the car body.