 scissors, cut offthe "skirt" ofthe plastic cover until it extends only about
one inch belowthe top ofthe rim ofthe can.
6. Make a notch in the "skirt," about one inch wide, where it fits over the pencil
SEAT attached to the can. The "skirt" in this notched area should be only
about 5/8ofan inch long, measured down from the top ofthe rim ofthe can.
7. Removethe plastic cover, and then tape the lower edges of the ••skirt," inside
and out, using shortlengths of 1/4-inch-widetape. Before securing each short
piece oftape, slightly open the tucks that are being taped shut on their edges,
so that the "skirt" flares slightly outward and the cover can be readily
removed.
9. FromthePatternPage(B)cutoutthe SCALE.ThentapetheSCALE to
the undersideofthe plasticcover,inthe positionshownon thepattern
for the cover, and also by the drawings. Preferably use transparent
tape. Be careful notto cover with tape any of the division lines on the
SCALE between 20 on the right and 20 on the left of O.
10. Put the plastic cover on the KFM can.Ico
0>o,
Ico
0>o,~_ •• _. _.,- "-J-- ---e---..·...
When preparing to charge a KFM, be sure its anhydrite is fresh. (Under humid
conditions, sometimes in only 2days enough water vapor willgo through the plastic
cover to make the dryingagent ineffective.) Besure no piece of anhydrite ison top of
another piece. Re-read VIII 7 and VIII 8.
tvtv\0
z
CIl
;dc:
Boz
CIl
~CII:lC1I
-'-i
Move the electrostatically charged part of the rubbed plastic rather slowly
past the upperend of the charging-wire, while lookingstraightdown on the
KFM. Keep the hard plastic approximately perpendicular to the charging-
wireand about 1/4 to 1/2 inch away from its upper end. The chargejumps
the spark gaps and charges the leaves of the KFM. Charge the leaves
sufficiently to give a reading of at least 15 mm.
Pull down on an insulating adjustment-thread to raise the lower end of the
charging-wire. (If the charging-wire has been held in itscharging position by
itssticky-ended adjustment-thread beingstuck to the top ofthe clear plastic
cover, to avoid possibly damaging the threads: (I) pull down a little on the
bare-endedadjustment-thread;and (2)detach, pull down on, and secure the
sticky-ended adjustment-thread to the sideofthe can, soas to raiseand keep
the lower end of the charging-wire closeto the underside of the clear plastic
cover.) Do not touch the charging-wire,because its insulation usually
is not goodenoughto preventthe chargefrom bleedingoffintothe
fingers.
To getthe most accurate readings possible.lightlybumporshake
the charged KFM (to remove any unstable part of the charge)
before taking the initial reading.
Ifthe initial reading is more than 20 mm, to get the most accurate
reading possible carefully partially discharge the leaves (by
touching them with the charging-wire while guiding the wire
with your fingers onits insulation), to reduce to 20mm orslightly
less the initialreadingthatyou will use. Orcompletelydischarge,
and recharge to 20 mm or slightly less.
To keep a KFM in excellent condition and to enable its drying
agent to last much longer before becoming ineffective. put the
whole KFM in an airtightcontainer, such as a large peanut butter
jar, with drying agent about an inchdeep on its bottom. Oratleast
keep the chargingpaperandthehardplasticchargingstripdry in
a sealablecontainer, suchas a Masonjar.with somedryingagent.
Charging a KFM from a Quickly Unwound Roll of Tape. (Quick unwinding
produces a harmless charge ofseveral thousand volts on the tape.)
a. Adjust the charging-wire so that its lowerend is about 1/16 inch above the
upper edges ofthe aluminum-foil leaves. Use the sticky-tape at the end of
one adjustment-thread to hold the charging-wire in this position. Stick this
tape approximately in line with the leaves, either on the side of the can or
on the plastic cover. (If the plastic cover is w~ak. 