 Box
5189, SantaCruz, California95063, and Defender
Industries, Inc., P.O. Box 820, New Rochelle,
NewYork 10802-0820. (Longestablished marine
supply companies also are good sources ofuse-
proven chemical toilets, first aid kits, lights,
rope, etc.)
Shelter roof surfaces should be gently
sloped, no matterhowgood a waterproofcoating
is to be applied. By making a concrete shelter
roofaslittleas 1inch thickeralongitscenterline
than along its sides, so that it slopes to both
sides, the prospects are improvedfor having an
earth-covered coated roof that will not leak for
decades.
Figures 17.1 and 17.2illustrate the following
ways to prevent having a wet shelter:
* Put a layer of gravel or crushed rock in
the bottom of the excavation, and install per-
forated drainage pipes if gravity drainage is
practical.
Ji. Cover the gravel or crushed rock in the
floor area with a plastic vapor barrier before
pouring a concrete floor.
Ji. Coat the outer surfaces of roof and walls
with bituminous waterproofingorothercoating
that has proved to be most effective in your
locality.
139
Ji. Backfill with gravel or crushed rock
againstthe walls, to keep the soilfrom possibly
becomingsaturated.Saturatedsoilexertshydro-
static pressure against walls, and may crack
them and cause them to leak. In some areas it is
more economical to cover a shelter's coated
wallswith a subsurfacedrainage matting(such
as Enkadrain, manufactured and sold by BASF
Corporation, Fibers Division, Enka, North
Carolina 28728). This will eliminate the costs of
backfilling with gravel or crushed rock.
NON-FLOATABLE SHELTERS
In most localities the water table usually is
belowthedepthofexcavationneededto buildor
install a belowground shelter. In some areas,
however, after rainy periods the water table
may rise until it is only a foot or two below the
surface. Then a watertight shelter may float
upward through the surroundingsaturatedsoil,
unless its weight plus the weightofits covering
earth is sufficienttowithstandits buoyancy. (In
many places swimming pools are kept full to
prevent them from being cracked by uneven
buoyant forces if the water table rises.)
Dramaticexamplesoffloating shelterswere
steel blast shelters, guaranteed by contractors
to be watertight, that were installed under the
lawns of some Houston, Texas homes shortly
after the Cuban Missile Crisis. When the water
table rose afterheavy rains, these shelterscame
up to the surface like giant mushrooms, to the
frustrated dismay of their owners and the satis-
faction of anti-defense newspaper feature
writers.
The most expensive permanent family fall-
out shelter described in a Federal Emergency
Management Agency free handout (pamphlet
H-12-1) is floatable. It is designed to be built of
reinforced concretecoveredby a flagstone patio
only about3 inches abovethe ground. Its6-inch-
thick concrete roof is covered by a total thick-
ness ofonly6 inches ofsand andflagstone. Like
the rest of FEMA's permanent shelters, no
prototype of this approximately PF-40 shelter
was built, nor is there any record of anyone
actually having built this shelter. In contrast,
the belowground shelterillustratedbyFigs. 17.1
and 17.2 would not float even if it did not have
assured gravity drainage of the surrounding
soil through the perforated drain pipes in the
gravel on which it rests, because this shelter is
weighted down by the thick earth berm on its
roof.
ADEQUATE,DEPENDABLE
VENTILATION/COOLING
Basic facts that you need to provide ade-
quate, dependable ventilation for a small ormedium sized shelter are given in Chapter 6,
Ventilation and Cooling of Shelters. A good
permanentshelterhastwo ventilation systems:
• The primary ventilation system of a small
permanent shelter should utilize a manually
operated centrifugal blower, or a homemade
Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump. (See Ap-
pendix E.) A satisfactory air pump must be
capable of supplying adequate outdoor air
through an air-intake pipe, a filter, and an air-
exhaustpipe. (See Figs. 17.1and 17.2.