 0.11) is
made by overlapping the ends ofits nearly horizontal
poles (Fig. 0.12). These poles [marked with a (1) in
Fig. 0.10] were each 4 feet 6 inches long and varied
uniformly in diameter from about 21/2 inches just
above the two pairs of wired-together posts, to 4-inch
diameters just below the triangular door frame of
poles. The triangular-shaped blast door was hingedto and closed against this door frame. The hinges
were strips cut from worn auto tires, to be described
shortly.
The upper section isformed by laying poles in a
triangular pattern, ends crossing at the angles, with
large ends and small ends placed so that the poles are
as nearly horizontal as is practical. Each of its three
corners is held together by strong wires that tightly
bind an outside and an inside small vertical pole, in
the same manner as the top of the Chinese "Man"
Shelter (shown in Fig. 0.9) is secured. (Instead of
No.9 soft steel wire, rope or twisted strips of strong
fabric could be used.)
Before starting to install the upper section of a
vertical triangular entry, the three outermost of the
six small vertical poles thatwillhold the three corners
together should be connected temporarily with three
small horizontal poles. Connect them at the height of
the door frame planned for the triangular blast door,
and space them so as to be the same size as this door'
frame.
Next, all the horizontal poles should be laid out
on the ground in the order of their increasing
diameters. The triangular entry then should be
started with the smallest poles at the base, with
increasingly large-diameter poles used toward the
top-so that the three pairs of small vertical poles will
press securely against all the horizontal side poles of
the entry.
To prevent the negative overpressure("suction")
phase of the blast from yanking out and carrying
away the blast door and the upper part of the vertical
entry to which it is hinged, the uppermost 4 or 5
horizontal poles of each of the three sides of the
vertical entry should be wired or tied securely
together. Rope or strips of strong cloth can be used if
strong wire is not available.
Before placing earth around this lightly con-
structed blast-protective entry, the vertical walls
must be covered to a thickness of about 6inches with
a yielding, crushable covering of limbs, brush, or
innerspring mattresses. Limbs or brush should be
placed in three layers, with the innermost layer at
right angles to the underlying poles. The yielding
thickness then is covered with strong cloth, such as
50% dacron bedsheets, or two thicknesses of 4-mil
polyethylene film. This outermost covering keeps
loose earth or sand from filling spaces inside the
yielding layer or running into the entry. Thus
protected, this vertical entry should be undamaged
by 25-psi blast effects of megaton weapons.
A vertical blast-protective entry can also be
made like a strong box, using 2-inch-thick boards.
Such entries afford blast protection up to 50 psi if
made as small as shown here and protected with
yielding materials such as a 6-inch-thick layer of
brush covered with strong cloth.
j
~22in. ~
.S
CD
~
• Install blast doors to keep out airborne blast
waves, blast wind, overpressure, blast-borne debris,
burning-hot dust and air, and fallout.
A fast-rising overpressure of as little as 5 psi will
break some people's eardrums. At overpressures of
15to 20 psi, 50% of the people who are exposed will
have their eardrums broken. However, persons near
a shelter wall may have their eardrums broken by
somewhat. less than half of these unreflected
overpressures. (Any wall may reflect blast waves and
greatly increase overpressures near it.) Broken
eardrums are not serious in normal times, but after a
nuclear attack this injury is likely to be far more
dangerous to persons in crowded shelters without'
effective medical treatment. Lung damage, that can
result from overpressures as low as 10 to 12 psi,
would also be more serious under post-attack
conditions.
A blast door must withstand blast waves and
overpressure. 