 as large an area as is damaged by
the blast. It can cause second-degree skin burns to
exposed people who are as far as ten miles from
a one-megaton (I MT) explosion. (See Fig. 1.4.)
(A I-MT nuclear explosion is one that produces the
same amount of energy as does one million tons of
TNT.) Ifthe weather is very clear and dry, the area of
fire danger could be considerably larger. On a cloudy
or smoggy day, however, particles in the air would
absorb and scatter much of the heat radiation, and
the area endangered by heat radiation from the
fireball would be less than the area of severe blast
damage.ORNL-DWG 78-6267
Fig. 1.4. An air burst. The fireball does not touch
the ground. No crater. An air burst produces only
extremelysmallradioactive particles-sosmall
that they are airborne for days to years unless
broughtto earth by rainor snow. Wetdeposition
of fallout from both surface and air bursts can
result in "hot spots" at, close to. or far from
ground zero. However, such "hot spots" from
air bursts are much less dangerous than the
fallout produced by the surface or near-surface
bursting of the same weapons.
The main dangers from an air burst are the blast
effects, the thermal pulses of intense light and heat
radiation, and the very penetrating initial nuclear
radiation from the fireball.
"Firestorrns"could occur only when the concentra-
tion of combustible structures is very high, as in the
verydense centers ofa fewold American cities. At rural
and suburban building densities, most people in earth-
covered fallout shelters would not have their lives
endangered by fires.
• Myth: In the worst-hit parts of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki where all buildings were demolished, every-
one was killed by blast, radiation, or fire.
• Facts: In Nagasaki, some people survived un-
injured who were far inside tunnel shelters built for
conventional air raids and located as close as one-third
mile from ground zero (the point directly below the
explosion). This was true even though these long, large
shelters lacked blast doors and were deep inside the
zone within which all buildings weredestroyed. (People
far inside long, large, open shelters are better protected
than are those inside small, open shelters.)
Fig. 1.5. Undamaged earth-covered family
shelter in Nagasaki.
Many earth-covered family shelters were essen-
tiallyundamaged inareas where blast and firedestroyed
all buildings. Figure 1.5shows a typical earth-covered,
backyard family shelter with a crude wooden frame.
This shelter was essentially undamaged, although less
than 100 yards from ground zero at Nagasaki.' The
calculated maximum overpressure (pressure above the
normal air pressure) was about 65 pounds per square
inch (65 psi). Persons inside so small a shelterwithouta
blast door would have been killed by blast pressure at
this distance from the explosion. However, in a recent
blast test,' an earth-covered, expedient Small-Pole
Shelter equipped with blast doors was undamaged at
53 psi. The pressure rise inside was slight-not even
enough to have damaged occupants'eardrums. Ifpoles
are available, field tests have indicated that many
families can build such shelters in a few days.
The great life-saving potential of blast-protective
shelters has been proven in war and confirmed by blast
tests and calculations. For example, the area in which
the air bursting of a l-megaton weapon would wreck a
50-psishelterwith blast doors inabout 2.7square miles.
Within this roughly circular area, practically all the
occupants of wrecked shelters would be killed by blast,
carbon monoxide from fires, or radiation. The same
blast effects would kill most people who were using
basements affording 5 psi protection, over an area of
about 58 square miles."
• Myth: Because some modern H-bombs are over
1000times as powerful as the A-bomb that destroyed
most of Hiroshima, these H-bombs are 1000times as
deadly and destructive.
• Facts: A nuclear weapon 1000times as powerful
as the one that blasted Hiroshima, if exploded under
comparable conditions, produces equally serious
blast damage to wood-frame houses over an area upto about 130times as large, not 1000times as large. 