 will prevent the adhesive (that will be used to attach each valve
'flap) from being applied too near the 2 x 4-in. holes, where adhesive
would keep a flap from opening fully.
g. Position each ofthe 6flaps properly in its closed position, with
its lower edge onthe line thatyou already have used the TEMPLATE
to draw 3/4 in. below each flap's pair of 2 x 4-in. holes. Position its
right side-edge on the line already drawn 1in. from the right side of
the right hole of each pair of 2 x 4-in. holes. Then put masking tape
over the lower edge ofeach flap and the adjacent plywood, to hold the
flap temporarily in its closed position.
h. Gently fold down the upper part of each flap, so that the
plywood above its pairof2x4-in. holesisuncovered(except whereyou
have placed the protective tape), and place small pieces of masking
tape so as to hold each flap temporarily in this folded-down position.
i. Quickly apply a thin coat of all-purpose construction adhesive
(such as Liquid Nails) to a 1/2-in.-wide plywood area above the
protective masking tape that covers the plywood up to the "tack line"
1/2 in. above each pair of 2 x 4-in. valve holes. Then promptly detach
the small pieces of masking tape holding the flap in its folded-down
position, and turn the flap (the lower partofwhich isstill being held in
its properclosed position by masking tape) into the whole flap's closed
position. Press the upper part firmly against the approximately 1/2-
in.-wide coating of adhesive, to secure the valve in its proper closed
position. Allow several hours for the adhesive to harden before
removing the tape and using the valve.
j. Drive small tacks (No.3; 3/8 in.) on the "tack line" (see
TEMPLATE), to make sure the flap stays securely attached after
long use. (Very small tacks are easily driven if held with tweezers or
needle-nosed pliers.)
o
Q
I
o
T ..I-----~.. ~PISTON ROO HOLE I
r--- 6-3/4 6- 3/4 ,--I
Fig. 9. Removable Partof Front End, Unfinished. Only the plywood
is shown.
CUTTING OUT THE PLYWOOD PARTS
1. The four parts of the "cylinder" (its bottom, two sides, and the
PARTITION; see Fig. 7)should be made with the wood grain of the
plywood running in the same direction as the lengths of these parts.
This reduces piston friction.
2. Outline on a sheetof exterior 3/4-in. plywood all of the plywood
parts-except for the 12 x 12-in. piston and the two 12 x 12-in.
construction forms, which are made of 3/8-in. exterior plywood. (If
:318-in. plywood is not available, use 1/4-in.) Do not assume that the
cornersofasheetofplywood are trulysquare. Alsocheck the widthof
the sawcut of the saw to be used, and allow for this width when
drawingadjacentoutlinesofpartsonthe plywood. Besureto makeall
corners square.
3. If you do not have a table saw that saws accurately, or a heavy-
duty saber saw, you will do well to pay a professional carpenter or
cabinet maker tosaw out the plywood parts-and also the piston rod if
you are making it out of an oak board. A professional can accurately
saw out all ofthe plywood partsand the 10valve holes inabout2 hours,
provided you have accurately outlined all saw lines.
4. Make the following plywood rectangles with tolerances of +or -
1/32 m.:
PARTITION, 12x 26-in:
Two sides, each 16-3/4 x 32-in. (If your "3/4-in. plywood" actually is
less than 11/16-in. thick, make the height of each of your sides
16-3/4-in. less the difference between 3/4-in. and the actual
thickness of your plywood. See Fig. 7.)
Bottom, 17-1/2 x 32-in.
Top, 13-1/2 x 32-in.
Two valve frames, each 4 x 12-in.
Piston, 12x 12-in.