 shelteror behind
a nearby shielding object at the first warning, which
may be the sudden cut-off of some radio
broadcasts.
REMAINING INSIDE SHELTER
Curiosity and ignorance probably will cause
many people to come out of sheltersa fewhours after
an attack warning, if no blast or obvious fallout has
endangered their area. This is dangerous, because
several hours after almost all missiles have been
launched the first enemy bombers may strike. Cities
and other targets that have been spared because
missiles malfunctioned or missed are likely to be
destroyed by nuclear bombs dropped during the first
several days after the first attack.
Most people should stay inside their shelters for
at least two or three days, even ifthey are in a locality
far from a probable target and even if fallout meter
readings prove there is no dangerous fallout.·
Exceptions would include some of the people who
would need to improve shelters or move to better
shelters. Such persons could do so at relatively small
risk duringthe interval between the ICBM explosions
and the arrival of enemy bombers and/or the start of
fallout deposition a few hours later.
Fallout would cover most of the United States
within 12 hours after a massive attack. People could
rarely depend on information received from distant
radio stations regarding changing fallout dangers and
advising when and for how long they could go outside
their shelters. Weather conditions such as wind speed
would cause fallout dangers to vary with distance. If
not forced by thirst or hunger to leave shelter, they
should depend on thei.rown fallout meter readings or
on radiation measurements made by neighbors or local
civildefense workers.HOW TO KEEP RADIOS OPERATING
Having a radio to receive emergency broadcasts
would be a great advantage. The stations that would
still be on the air after an attack would probably be
too distant from most survivors to give them reliable
information concerning local, constantly changing
fallout dangers. However, both morale and the
prospects of long-range survival would be improved
in shelters with a radio bringing word of the large-
area fallout situation, food-relief measures, practical
survival skills, and what the government and other
organizations were doing to help. Radiocontact with
the outside world probably can be maintained after
an attack if you remember to:
• Bring all of your family's battery-powered,
portable radios with you to shelter, along with all
fresh batteries on hand.
• Protect AM radios by using only their built-in
short loop antennas. The built-in antennas of small
portable radios are too short for EMP to induce
damaging surges of current in them.
• Keep antennas of FM, CB, and amateur radios
as short as practical, preferably less than 10 inches.
When threatened by EMP, a danger that may con-
tinue for weeks after the initial attack because of
repeated, high-altitude explosions, do not add a wire
antenna or connect a short radio antenna to a pipe.
Remember that a surge of current resulting from
EMP especially can damage diodes and transistors,
thus ending a radio's usefulness or reducing its range
of reception.
• Keep all unshielded radios at least six feet away
from any long piece of metal, such as pipes, metal
ducts, or wires found in many basements and other
shelters. Long metal conductors can pick up and
carry large EMP surges, causing induced current
to surge in nearby radios and damage them.
• Shield each radio against EMP when not in use
by completely surrounding it with conducting metal
ifit is kept within six feet ofa long conductorthrough
which powerful currents produced by EMP might
surge. A radio may be shielded against EMP by
placing it inside a metal cake box or metal storage
can, or by completely surrounding it with aluminum
foil or metallic window screen.
• Disconnect the antenna cable of your car radio
at the receiver-or at least ground the antenna when
not in use by connecting it with a wire to the car
frame. Use tape or clothespins to assure good metal-
to-metal contact. The metal of an outside mirror is
a convenient grounding-point. Park your car as near
to your shelter as practical, so that after fallout
has decayed sufficiently you may be able to use
the car radio to get distant stations that are still
broadcasting.
• Prevent possible damage to a radio from ex-
treme dampness (which may result from long
occupancy of some belowground shelters) by keep-
ing it sealed in a clear plastic bag large enough so
the radio can be operated while inside. 