nuclear weapons must first beconvinced that nuclear
war would not inevitably be the end of them and
everything worthwhile. Only after they have begun to
question the truth of these myths do they become
interested, under normal peacetime conditions, in
acquiring nuclear war survival skills. Therefore,
before giving detailed instructions for making and
using survival equipment, we will examine the most
harmful of the myths about nuclear war dangers,
along with some of the grim facts.
• Myth: Fallout radiation from a nuclear war
would poison the airand all parts of the environment.
It would kill everyone. (This is the demoralizing
message of On the Beach and many similar pseudo-
scientific books and articles.)
• Facts: When a nuclear weapon explodes near
enough to the ground for its fireball to touch the
ground, it forms a crater. (See Fig. I.I.) Many
ORNL-DWG 78-6264
WIND
Fig. 1.1. A surface burst. Ina surface or near-surface burst, the fireball touches the ground and blasts a crater.IL
thousands of tons of earth from the crater of a large
explosion are pulverized into trillions of particles.
These particles are contaminated by radioactive
atoms produced by the nuclear explosion. Thou-
sands of tons of the particles are carried up into a
mushroom-shaped cloud, miles above the earth.
These radioactive particles then fall out of the
mushroom cloud, or out of the dispersing cloud of
particles blown by the winds-thus becoming fallout.
Each contaminated particle continuouslygivesoff
invisible radiation, much like a tiny X-ray machine-
while in the mushroom cloud, while descending, and
after having fallen to earth. The descending radioactive
particlesare carried bythe winds likethe sand and dust
particles ofa miles-thick sandstormcloud-except that
they usually are blown at lower speeds and in many
areas the particlesare so far apart that no cloud isseen.
The largest, heaviest fallout particles reach the ground
first, in locations close to the explosion. Many smaller
particles are carried by the winds for tens to thousands
of miles before falling to earth. At anyone place where
fallout from a singleexplosion isbeingdeposited on the
ground in concentrations high enough to require the
use of shelters, deposition will be completed within a
few hours.
The smallest fallout particles-those tiny enough
to be inhaled into a person's lungs-are invisible to the
naked eye. These tiny particles would fall so slowly
from the four-mile or greater heights to which
1000 1000 R/hr
1 hr AFTER
900
800
700
.c 6002
w
I- 500<ta:W(J)
0 4000
300
200
100
they would be injected by currently deployed
Soviet warheads that most would remain air-
borne for weeks to years before reaching the
ground.Bythattimetheirextremelywidedisper-
sal and radioactive decay would make them
much lessdangerous. Only where suchtiny par-
ticles are promptly brought to earth by rain-
outs or snow-outs in scattered "hot spots," and
laterdried and blown about bythe winds, would
these invisible particles constitute a long-term
and relatively minor post-attack danger.
The air in properly designed fallout shelters,
even those without air filters, is free of radioactive
particles and safe to breathe except in a few rare
environments-as will be explained later.
Fortunately for all living things, the dangerfrom
fallout radiation lessens with time. The radioactive
decay, as this lessening iscalled, is rapid at first, then
gets slower and slower. The dose rate (the amount of
radiation received per hour) decreases accordingly.
Figure 1.2' illustrates the rapidity of the decay of
radiation from fallout during the first two days after
the nuclear explosion that produced it. R stands for
roentgen, a measurement unit often used to measure
exposure to gamma rays and X rays. Fallout meters
called dosimeters measure the dose received by
recording the number of R. Fallout meters called
survey meters, or dose-rate meters, measure the dose
rate by recording the number of R being received per
hour at the time of measurement. Notice that it takes
about seven times as long for the dose rate to decay
ORNL·DWG 78-6265
48
HOURS AFTER THE EXPLOSION
Fig. 1.2. Decay of the dose rate of radiation from fallout, from the time
of the explosion, not from the time of fallout deposition.