
KEEP THIS SMALL PART
OF THE 1/4 IN. TAPE ,{
VERTICAL
WHILE PULLING TAPE
AROUND RIM OF CAN
RUBBER
BAND
OR
STRING
Keep vertical the small
part of the tape that
presses against the rim of
the can while pulling the
length ofthe tape horizontally around the can so as to bind the top ofthe pl~stic
cover snugly to the rim. Ifthis small part of the tape is kept vertical. the lower
edge ofthe tape will not squeeze the plastic below the rim of the can to such a
small circumference as to prevent the coverfrom being removed quite easily.
Make the cover so it fits
snugly. but can be taken
off and replaced readily.
Just below the top of the rim
ofthe can, bind the covering
plastic in place with a 1/4-
inch-wide piece of strong
tape. (Cloth duct tape is
best.Usetwothicknesses.
If only freezer or masking
tape is available, use three
or four thicknesses.)
To make the SEAT. cut a piece of a wooden pencil. or a stick. about one inch
long and tape it securely to the side of the can along the center line marked
SEAT on the pattern. Be sure the upper end of this piece of pencil is at the
same position as the top of the location for the SEAT outlined on the pattern.
The top of the SEAT is 3/4 inch below the top of the can. Be sure not to cover
or make illegible any part of the table printed on the paper pattern.
Cut out one of the"Reminders for Operators" and glue and/or tape it to the
unused side of the KFM. Then if is best to cover all the sides of the finished
KFM with clear plastic tape or varnish. This will keep sticky-tape on the end of
an adjustment thread or moisture from damaging the ..Reminders" or the
table.
s.
l.
2.
4.
3.
6.
XI. Install the Aluminum-Foil Leaves
In preparation for suspending the leaves inside the can. make two
shallow notches in the top ofthe rim of the can. Make one notch above
each of the two lines ("FASTEN THREADS HOLDING ALUMINUM
LEAVES HERE") on the paper Pattern attached to the outside of the
can. Make flat-bottomed notches by first filing a V-shaped notch. and
then using a fine-toothed hacksaw blade to make the notch rectangu-
lar. (If a file and/or a hacksaw blade are not available. the leaf-
suspending threads can be taped to the top of the rim of the can.)
Usethe two small pieces of tape stuck to the ends of a leaf-suspending thread to
attach the thread to the outside of the can. Attach the tapes on opposite sides of
the can. so as to suspend the leaf inside the can. See END VIEW sketch. Each of
the two marks on the attached thread MUSTrest exactlyina notch (oron the
top of the rim of the can. if you are unable to make notches). Be sure
thatthe hem-side ofeach ofthe two leaves will face outward. SeeEND
VIEW sketch.
Position and secure the second leaf. being sure that:
a. The smooth sides of the two leaves are not wrinkled or bent and face each
other. and are flush (= "right together") when not charged. See END VIEW
sketch and study the first photo illustration. "An Uncharged KFM".
b. The upperedges of the two leaves are suspended side by side and at the same
distance below the top of the can.
c. The leaf-suspending threads are in their notches in the top ofthe rim of
the can (or are taped with Band-Aid to the top of the rim ofthe can)
so that putting the cover on will not move the threads.
d. No parts of the leaf-suspending threads inside the can are taped down to the
can or otherwise restricted.
e. The leaf-suspending parts of the threads inside the can do not cross over,
entangle or restrict each other.
f. The threads come together where they go over the rim of the can. and
the leaves are flat and hang together as shown in the first photo illustration.
."An Uncharged KFM".
g. The leaves look like these photographed leaves. If not. make new,
better leaves and install them.
