 would reach the 50-psi over-
pressure range after the blast wave had arrived and
had torn the expedient protective coverings from the
wood. However, as has been observed in megaton
nuclearweapon tests, the dustcloud first produced by
the popcorning effect and later by the blast winds
would screen solid wood near the ground so
effectively against thermal radiation that itwould not
be ignited, provided it had been initially protected as
described above.)
PRECAUTIONS FOR OCCUPANTS
OF BLAST SHELTERS
Although a wellconstructed blastsheltermay be
undamaged at quite high overpressure ranges, its
occupants may be injured or killed as a result of rapid
ground motions that move the whole shelter several
inches in a few thousandths of a second. Rapid
ground motions are not likely to cause serious
injuries unless the shelterisinan area subjected to 30-
psi or greaterblast effects. To prevent possible injury,
when the occupants of high-protection blast shelters
are expecting attack they should avoid:
• Having their heads close to the ceiling. The "air
slap" of the air-blast wave may push down the earth
and an undamaged shelter much more rapidly thana
person can fall. If one's head were to be only a few
inches from the ceiling, a fractured skull could result.
• Leaning against a wall, because it may move
very rapidly, horizontally as well as vertically.
• Sitting or standing on the floor, because ground
shock may cause the whole shelter (including the
floor) to rise very fast and injure persons sitting or
standing on the floor. The safest thingto do isto sit or
lie in a securely suspended, stronghammock or chair,
or on thick foam rubber such as that ofa mattress, or
on a pile of small branches.
In dry areas or inadry expedientshelter, ground
shock may produce choking dust. Therefore, shelter
occupants should be prepared to cover their faces
with towels or other cloth, or put on a mask. If an
attack is expected, they should keep such protective
items within easy reach.Appendix E
How to Make and Use a Homemade
Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump and Filter
THE :-iEED
\.entilating pumps-mostly centrifugal blowers capable ofoperat-
ing against quite high resistance toairflow-are used to force outdoor
air through most high-protection-factor fallout shelters and through
almost all permanent blastshelters. Low-pressure ventilatingdevices,
including- ordinary bladed fans and homemade air pumps such as
KAPs and Directional Fans, cannot force enough air through a
permanent shelter's usual air-supply system consistingof pipes, or of
pipes with a blast valve, a filter, and the valves needed to maintain a
positive pressure within the shelter.
Manually cranked centrifugal blowers, or blowers that can either
be powered by an electric motor or be hand-cranked, are the
preferred meansof ventilating permanentshelters from Switzerland
toChina. The main disadvantagesofefficientcentrifugal blowersare:
I. They are quite expensive. Forexample, in 1985agood American
hand-cranked blower. that pumpsonly about50cubic feet per minute
150cfm) through a shelter's pipes, blast valve and filter, retails for
around $250. An excellent foreign blower that enables one man to
pump somewhat larger volumes sells for about twice as much.
2. Not enough centrifugal blowers could be manufactured quickly
enough to equip all shelters likely to be built during a recognized
crisis threatening nuclear attack, and lasting for weeks to several
months.
Therefore, there is need for an efficient. manually operated, low-
cost ventilating pump that:
I. Can pump adequate volumes of outdoor air through shelter-
ventilating systems that have quite high resistances-up to several
inches water gauge pressure differential.
2. WiIIbeserviceableafter at leastseveral weeksofcontinuous use.
3. Can be built at low cost in home workshops by many Americans,
using only materials available in most towns.
4. Could be made by the millions in thousands of shops allover the
V.S..for mass production during a recognized prolonged crisis, using
only plywood and other widely available materials.
To produce such a shelter ventilating pump, during the past 20
years I have worked intermittently designing and building several
types of homemade air pumps. 