est material you have for these
horizontal ties across the center of the crib.
(8) Excavate earth 10 ft or so beyond the outer
sides of the cribs. To save work, carry it in
buckets and dump it inside the cribs. (Two
children can carry a heavy bucket of earth by
running a strong, 4-ft stick through the bail
or handle of the bucket and tying the bail to
the center of the stick before lifting.) Save
earth closer to the cribs to put on the roof.
(9) Fill the lined crib with earth from which
almost all grass, roots, and the like have been
removed. Avoid placing hard lumps of earth
in contact with the lining. Fill the crib so that
the surface of the earth inside it is about 4in.
above the upper sides of the uppermost
horizontal poles.
19. Line the narrow spaces between adjacent cribs
with cloth or plastic; then fill these spaces with
eartha littleata time, tampingrepeatedlyso as to
avoid leaving air spaces.
20. Place the 9-ft roof poles over the main room. (If
poles are unavailable and boards 11/2 in. thick are
available, use two thicknesses of boards.) Usethe
strongest roof poles (or double-thickness boards
nailed together) nearest the entryways. Then put
shorter, 5- or 6-ft poles or boards over the
entryways.
21. To keep earth from falling through the cracks
between the roof poles, put sticks in the larger
cracks and coverthe roofwith two or more thick-
nesses of cloth, plastic, or other material. News-
papers will do, if better materials are lacking.
22. Put earth on the roof to the depths shownfor the
illustrated "buried roof." Besure to slope all sides
and smooth this gently mounded earth surfaceso
that the buried roof will shed water.
23. So thatthe earth cover near the outeredges of the
roof will be a full 2 ft thick, make the earth cover
slope steeply near the edges. Steep earth slopes
can be made and kept stable by using large lumps
of turf to make a steep bank, or by using earth-
filled "rolls" of cloth or other material along the
edges of a roof.
24. Put in place the waterproof material of the
buried roof.
25. Pile on the rest of the earth cover, as illustrated,
to at least a full 2-ft thickness.
26. Smooth the surface ofthe earth cover, including
the sides, so that rain will run off. Do not walk on
the finished roof.
27. To prevent rainwater on the ground outside from
running into the entryways, make mounds of
packed earth about4 in. high acrossthe entryway
floors. Make the mounds about 2 ft from the
outer ends of the floors. Dig a shallow drainage
ditch completely around the shelter.
28. Unless the weather is cold, install your shelter-
ventilating KAP in the entry into which you can
feel air moving naturally. (If short of time or
materials, make a small Directional Fan.)
29. To prevent fallout or rain from falling onto the
floor of the outerentryways, place smallawnings
(not illustrated) over the openings.
30. If time and energy are available, mound earth all
around the shelter. Doing so will reduce fire
hazards by covering flammable materials; it also
will increase fallout protection.
31. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all waterstored inexpedient containers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water.
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible
to boil water when needed.
32. Put all ofyour emergency tools inside your
shelter.
33. Astime and materials permit, continue to improve
your chances of surviving by doing as many of the
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemade fallout meter, asdescribed
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Makeand hangexpedient bedsheet-hammocks.
(3) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. 