 occupants against ex-
cessive exposure to initial nuclear radiation.
Edward Teller, Ph.D., nuclear physicist,
leading inventor of offensive and defensive
weapons, a strong supporter of civil defense
at OakRidge National Laboratory andworld-
wide-forcontributingtheForeword,original-
ly written for the American Security Council
1980 edition, and for his urging which moti-
vated the author to work on this 1987 edition.
Eugene P. Wigner, Ph.D., physicist and
mathematician, Nobel laureate, Professor
Emeritus of Theoretical Physics, Princeton
University,a principalinitiatorofthe Nuclear
Age and a prominent leader of the civil
defensemovement-forencouragingthewrit-
ingofthe originaleditionofthis book, contri-
buting the About the Author section, and
improving drafts, especially of the appendix
on expedient blast shelters.
Edwin N. York, M.S., nuclear physicist,
SeniorResearchEngineer, BoeingAerospace
Company, designer of blast-protective struc-
tures-for overall review and recommenda-
tions, particularly those based on his exten-
siveparticipationinnuclearandconventional
blasttests, andfor improvingboththeoriginal
and this edition.
Civildefense officialsinWashingtonand
several states for information concerning
strengths and weaknesses of official civil
defense preparations.
Helen C. Jernigan for editing the 1979
manuscript, and especially for helping to
clarify technical details for non-technical
readers.
May E. Kearny for her continuinghelp in
editing, and for improving the index.
Ruby N. Thurmer for advice and assis-
tance with editing the original edition.
Marjorie E. Fish for her work on the
photographs and drawings.
Janet Sprouse for typing and typesetting
the additions in the 1987 edition.Introduction
SELF-HELP CIVIL DEFENSE
Your best hope of surviving a nuclear war
in this century is self-help civil defense -
knowing the basic facts about nuclear weapon
effects and what you, your family, and small
groupscando to protectyourselves. OurGovern-
ment continues to downgrade war-related sur-
vival preparations and spends only a few cents
a yearto protecteach Americanagainst possible
wardangers. Duringthe 10yearsormore before
the Strategic Defense Initiative (Star Wars)
weapons can be invented, developed and de-
ployed, self-help civil defense will continue to
be your main hope of surviving if we suffer a
nuclear attack.
Most Americans hope that Star Wars will
lead to the deployment of new weapons capable
of destroying attacking missiles and warheads
in flight. However, no defensive system can be
made leak-proof. If Star Wars, presently only a
research project, leads to a deployed defensive
system, then self-help civil defense will be a
vital part of our hoped for, truly defensive
system to prevent aggressions and to reduce
losses if deterrence fails.
PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF THIS BOOK
This book iswritten for the majority of Americans
who want to improve their chances of surviving a
nuclear war. It brings together field-tested instructions
that have enabled untrained Americans to make
expedient fallout shelters, air pumps to ventilate and
cool shelters, fallout meters, and other expedient life-
support equipment. ("Expedient", as used in civil
defense work, describes equipment that can be made by
untrained citizens in 48 hours or less, while guided
solely by field-tested, written instructions and using
only widely available materials and tools.) Also
described are expedient ways to remove even
dissolved radioiodinefrom water, and to process
and cook whole grains and soybeans, our main
food reserves. Successive versions of these
instructions have been used successfully by
families working under simulated crisis condi-
tions, and have been improved repeatedly by
Oak Ridge National Laboratory civil defense
researchers and others over a periodof 14years.
These improved instructions are the heart of
this updated 1987 edition of the original Oak
Ridge National Laboratory survival book first
published in 1979.
The average American has far too little informa-
tion that would help him and his family and our
country survive a nuclear attack, and many of his
beliefsabout nuclearwar are bothfalseand dangerous.
Since the A-bomb blasted Hiroshima and hurled
mankind into the NuclearAge,only duringa recognized
crisis threatening nuclear war have most Americans
been seriously interested in improving their chances of
surviving a nuclear attack. 