up and separates air into spaces no more than 1/8 inch
ORNL-OWG 77-18426
Fig. 15.1. Efficient body insulation.
across has efficient cells of "dead" air. Air that is
within 1/16 inch of any surface-whether that of a
filament of goose down or of a piece of paper-is
slowed down by "sticking" to that surface and
becoming hard to move. Trapped "dead" air moves
outward very slowly, carrying heat away from the
body at a slow rate-thus minimizing heat losses by
convection.
• Use windbreaker materials. An outer wind-
breaker layer of clothing that is essentially air-tight,
such as a brown paperbag worn overa knit wool cap,
prevents the escape of warmed air and results in an
insulating layer of trapped "dead" air. A single layer
of good windbreaker material also prevents cold
outside air from being blown into the insulating
material and displacing warmed air (Fig. 15.1).
The bestwindbreaker materials permit very little
air to pass through them, while at the same time they
allow watervaporto escape. Perspiration that cannot
be felt or seen on cool skin continually evaporates,
.forming warm water vapor close to the skin. This
moisture escapes outward through good insulating
and windbreaker materials; as a result, underlying
body insulation remains dry and efficient. Water
vapor can pass readily through many sheets of
newspaper or unglazed brown paper, although not
enough wind can flow through a single sheet to be
felt.
• Prevent excessive heat iosses by conduction.
Body heat also is lost by conduction-the direct flow
of heat into a colder material. For example, if one
sleeps in an excellent goose-down sleeping bag laid
directly on cold ground, body weight will compress
the down to a small fraction of an inch. This barrier
to heat flow istoo thin and willcause the body to lose
heat rapidly to the cold earth. Likewise, the soles ofordinary shoes are such poorinsulators that standing
or walking on frozen ground sometimes results in
frozen feet.
MINIMIZING HEAT LOSSES
FROM HEAD AND NECK
The head and neck of the girl pictured in Fig.
15.2 are insulated almost as well as if she were
wearing the hood of a skin-side-out Eskimo parka.
She folded a large, fluffy bath towel and placed it
over her head, neck, and the upper part of her body.
A brown paper bag was worn over the towel. The
edges of the face hole cut in the bag were taped to
prevent tearing. A strip of cloth was tied around the
part of the bag over her neck. Such a parka-like
covering not only is the most efficient way to insulate
the head and neck but also prevents air warmed by
the body from escapingupward around the neck. The
girl also iswearinga man's shirt large enough to cover
and hold thick newspaper insulation around her
body and arms.
Fig. 15.2. A bath towel and a paper bag used to
efficiently insulate head, neck, and shoulders.
It is very important to prevent heat losses from
the head and neck, which have many blood vessels
near the skin surface. Heat losses from these vital
parts cannot be sensed nearly as well as heat losses
from other parts of the body. Furthermore, blood
vessels near the surface in the head and neck do not
automatically constrict to reduce heat losses, as they
do in other parts of the body when heat is being lost
faster than it can besupplied by metabolism. So when
a person is in the cold-particularly when inac-
tive-he should keep his hands, feet, and whole body
warmer by insulating his head and neck very well.
(One difficulty in following this advice is that a well-
covered head often will feel unpleasantly warm-
even sweaty-before one's body temperature rises
enough to increase the warming flow of blood to
hands and feet.)
INSULATING THE WHOLE BODY
Occupants of freezing-cold shelters can keep
warm enough to sleep without blankets by skillfully
using ordinary indoor clothing plus paper and pieces
of cloth to insulate their whole bodies. The girls
pictured in Fig. 15.3 slept without a blanket in a
frozen Door-Covered Trench Shelter while the night
temperature outdoors dropped to 10°F. The shelter's
ventilation openings were adjusted so that the inside
temperature remained a few degrees below freezing,
to prevent frozen earth from melting into icy mud.
