 in a dose of 30 R/hr x
1/30 hr = lR.) Under nuclear war conditions,
receiving an occasional dose of lR (1,000 milli-
roentgens) would be of little concern, as ex-
plained in Chapter 13 and 18.
WARNINGS FOR BUYERS OF
FALLOUT METERS
You are "on your own" when buying a dose
rate meter or dosimeter because:
• No U.S. Government agency or other Gov-
ernment facility advises the public regarding
sources of the best available radiation-measur-
inginstrumentsfor use in timeofwar, orwarns
concerned individuals that certain instruments
are either incapable of measuring adequately
high dose rates or doses for wartime use, or are
dangerously inaccurate. For example, a dose
rate meter that in 1982 sold nationwide was
testedinthatyearatOakRidge NationalLabora-
tory to determine its accuracy for measuring
gamma radiation. This instrument was reason-
ably accurate at low dose rates, but at the high
dose rates of life or death importance in a
nuclearwar its readings weredangerouslylow:
When it should have read 150 R/hr, it read 13.9
R/hr. Another dose rate meter of this same
model, tested in CaliforniabyDr. BruceClayton,
read only 16 R/hr when it should have read 400
R/hr. Obviously, if this model were used and
trustedby a persondoingrescue workfor hours
outdoors in heavy fallout, while believing that
he was receiving a non-incapacitating dose he
actually would be getting a fatal dose!
• Instrumentsthatmeasureonlymilliroentgen-
range dose rates are sold for war use by some
companies. Since mostAmericanshaveno idea
what size of radiation doses would incapacitate
or kill them, and do not even know that a
milliroentgen is 1/1000 of a roentgen, some
people buy instruments that are capable of
measuring maximum dose rates of only one
roentgen or less per hour. For example, an
American company advertised and sold for
$370.00 in 1986 its dose rate meter that has a
maximum range of "0 - 1000 mR/hr." It is the
onlydose rate meterin thatcompany'slistingof
"Radiation Detection Products for the General
Public", described as" ... applicable for use in
case of nuclear war." The highest dose rate that
itcan measure, one roentgen per hour, is far too
low to be of much use in a nuclear war.
• Used and surplus dose rate meters and dosi-
meters are likely to be inaccurate or otherwise
unreliable. Very few buyers have access to a
radiation source powerful enough to check in-
strumentsfor accuracyovertheirfull rangesof
measurements.Myeducationregardingbargain
fallout meters began in 1961, after I bought two
dosimeters of a model then beingproduced by a
leadingmanufacturingcompanyand purchased
in quantity by the Office of Civil Defense.
Withina weekafterreceivingtheseinstruments,
one ofthemcouldnotbe charged. The otherwas
found to be inaccuate. Later I learned that the
manufacturing company sold to the public its
instruments that did not pass Government
quality tests.
Most Federal and State organizations do
not criticize faulty civil defense products, ap-
parentlybecausetheyare notcharged withthis
responsibilityandwanttoavoidangeringmanu-
facturers and sellers who may go to their Con-
gressmen orLegislators to seekredressforlost
sales.
In this book I am not giving the names of
any of the companies that sell or have sold
potentially life-endangeringsurvival items. To
do so would reduce the chances of this book
being distributed or advocated by Government
agencies.
WAR RESERVES OF FALLOUT METERS
One of Americans' most important assets
for surviving a' nuclear war is the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA's)
supply of fallout meters. These instruments
include approximately 600,000 dose rate meters
and about 3,300,000 dosimeters, all suitable for
wartime use. In 1986 almost all of these old
instruments-thatcanbe found-reportedlystill
are in good working condition. Because ofcon-
tinuing inadequate funding for civil defense, in
. recent years most of FEMA's instruments have
been serviced, calibrated, and, if necessary,
repaired only once every four years. 