lower edges of the leaves. lfthc right
leaf is at 10 mm and the Idt leaf isat
7mrn. the KFM reads 17rnrn. Never
takea reading while a lcatis touching
a stop-thread. Never use a KFM
reading that is less than 5 mm.
REMINDERS FOR OPERATORS
lhe drying agent inside a KFM is Finding how long it takes to get a
O.K. if. when the charged KFM is certain R dose: If the dose rate is 1.6
not e-xposed to radiation. its readings R hr outside and a person is willing
decrease bvl rnm or less in J hours. to take a 6 R dose. how long can he
remain outside'! Answer:
h R : I.h R hr =3.75 hr =
J hours and 45 minutes.
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and il
after a l-rninutc exposure it reads 5
mm. the difference in readings is 12
mm. The attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.6 R hr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: II a person works
outside for J hours where the dose
rate is 2 R hr. what is his radiation
dose" Answer: J hr x 2 R hr =6 R.
Fallout radiation guidt"5for a hcalthv
person not previously exposed to a
total radiation dose of more than
HXl R during a Z-wcek period:
Finding how long it takes to get a
certain R dose: Ifthe dose rate is I.n
R hr outside and a person is willing
to take a nR dose. how long GHl he
remain outside? Answer:
h R : I.h R hr = 3.75 hr =
.\ hours and 45 minutes
6 R per Jay can he tolerated for up to
two months without losing the ability
to work.
100 R in a week or less is not likclv to
seriously sicken. -
350 R in a few days results in a
50-50 chance of dying, under
post-attack conditions.
600 R in a week or less is almost
certain to cause death within a fc\l,
weeks.
(he drying agent inside a KFM is
O.K. if. when the charged KFM i-,
not exposed to radiation. ih readings
decrease hy I mrn.or it.'ssin J hours.
Reading: With the reading eye 12
inches vcrticallv above the scat. note
on the mm scale the separation of the
lower edges of the leaves. If the right
leaf is at 10rum and the left leaf isat
7 rum. the KFM reads 17 mm. Never
take a reading while a leaf istouching
a stop-thread. Never usc a KFM
reading that is less than 5 rnrn.
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and it
after a l-minutc exposure it reads 5
rnm. the difference in readings is 12
mill. lhc attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.fl R hr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: If a person works
outside for .\ hours where the dose
rate is 2 R he what is his radiation
dose'! Answer: J hr x 2 R hr e 6 R.
IV
W\C)INSTRUCTIONS
(A)
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PERSONS CONCERNED
WITH REPRODUCING THE KFM INSTRUCTIONS
The KFM instruction pages are printed so that they can be readily cut out and pasted up (using the
"LA YOUT FOR 12-PAGE TABLOID"given on page 242)to expedite rapid reproduction preparatoryto
mass distribution. No authorization is required to reproduce this survival information.
Allof the paste-ups should be photo-reduced to fit yoursizenewspaper,.EXCEPTfourcut-outs[paste-ups
(15), (18), (21) and (24)] and one drawing [paste-up (26)] SHOULD REMAIN AT 100%.
