, molten-
dipped galvani-zed wire.)
Make the square top of the filter box so that it covers the upper
edges of the box's sides and can be easily removed. Then cut in its
centera round holeslightlysmallerthan 4inches indiameter. File the
hole'sedgessothata4-inch-diametercan (such as acoffeecan with its
top and bottom cut out) fits snugly in this hole. To connect the can
securely and airtight, first use waterproof construction adhesive or
epoxy, and then tape. (If construction adhesive or epoxy is not
available, cut a 2-1/2-inch-diameterhole inthe centerofthebottom of
the 4-inch-diametercan. Then makeradial cuts spaced aboutone-half
inch apart,out tothe full diameterofthecan. Bend these tabsoutward
180 degrees, preparatory to tacking them with small tacks to the
bottom of the filter box top. Tape airtight.)
Sothat the top ofthe filter boxcan beeasily removed, tape itonto its
box. Aroll ofducttapeshould bekept with the filter boxand pumpat
all times.
To connect the filter box to the shelter's air-intake pipe, the best
widely available air duct isthe inexpensive, 4-inch-diameter flexible
duct used with clothes dryers.
SEALED WITH
DUCT TAPE)
-- -- - - --------::...---
DUCT TAPE
SEALED WITH
DUCT TAPE'
20.20 IN
REMOVABLE TOP
SUPPORT
3/4.3/4.20 IN.
TWO 20' 20<2 IN. "1:~=r--------'''FURNACE FILTERS
TOWEL
GALVANIZED-WIRE
HARDWARE CLOTH
Homemade Filter To Fit On Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump, and To Be Connected to a 4-Inch-Diameter Air-Intake Pipe.Filter Materials
Furnace or air-conditioner dust filters, those made of oiled fiber-
glass fibers. will remove practically all but the very smallest fallout
particles. Filters that are sold in box-like housings can easily be
installed sothatall the pumped air will passthrough them. by taping
them to the inner sides of the filter box. The illustration shows two
plain matsof furnace filter material. each taped around its edges. (If
commercial dust filters are not available, bath towel cloth will serve.
However, in very dusty areas a cloth filter may become overloaded,
thus seriously reducing the rate of airflow much sooner than if an
oiled fiber filter is used as a prefilter.)
To filter out most of the tiny particles that may pass through one or
more furnace filters, place two thicknesses of bath towel on top of the
filter-support made of hardware cloth, and tape them around their
edges to the box. See illustration.
Tests by U.S. Army specialists have shown that filtering air
through two thicknesses of bath towel removes about 85 percent of
even microscopic aerosols as small as 1to 5 microns in diameter. (See
"Emergency Respiratory Protection Against Radiological and Bio-
logical Aerosols", by H. G. Guyton et al., A.M.A. Archives of
Industrial Health, Vol. 20,July through Dec. 1959.)This is the size of
most infective aerosols used in biological warfare. In most of an area
subjected to a biological attack, if 85 percent of this size-range of
infective aerosols and practically all larger particles are removed,
then most persons breathing this filtered air will not receive enough
infective agents to infect and sicken them.
Persons who are especially desirous of protecting their shelter's
occupantsagainst biological warfare aerosols, butwho can not afford
or obtain expensive High Efficiency Particulate Air filters (HEPA
filters), should consider using disposable pleated air filters that meet
official ASHRAE standards. One 2-in. pleated air filter, measuring
19-1/2 x 19-1/2 in., will remove over 90 percent of particles in the
1.0-5.0micron range, yetwhen clean its resistance toan airflowof200
cfm isonly about 0.2 in. watergauge(about0.007 psi). Its cost isabout
twice thatofagood ordinary furnace filterofthesamesize. However,
it has approximatelythree times the lifeofa standard panel type filter
before becoming overloaded. Disposable pleated air filters are avail-
able in larger cities.
