
TO BUILD:TO MAKE MEAL AND FLOUR:
(I) Put clean, dry grain ONE INCH DEEP in the
can.
(2) To prevent blistering your hands, wear gloves,
or wrap cloth around the upper part of the
bundle of pipes.
(3) Place the can (or open-ended cylinder) on a hard,
smooth, solid surface, such as concrete.
(4) To pound the grain, sit with the can held between
your feet. Move the bundle of pipes straight
up and down about 3 inches, with a rapid
stroke.
(5) If the can is 4 inches in diameter, in 4 minutes
you should be able to pound 112 lb (one cup) of
whole-kernel wheat into 1/5 lb of fine meal and
flour, and 3/10 lb of coarse meal and fine-cracked
wheat.
(6) To separate the pounded grain into fine meal,
flour, coarse meal, and fine-cracked wheat, use
a sieve made of window screen.
(7) To separate flour for feeding small children,
place some pounded grain in an 18 X 18-inch
piece of fine nylon net, gather the edges of the
net together so as to hold the grain, and shake
this bag-like container.
(8) To make flour fine enough for babies, pound fine
meal and coarse flour still finer, and sieve it
through a piece of cheesecloth or similar
material.
As soon as fallout decay permits travel, the
grain-grinding machines on tens of thousands of hog
and cattle farms should be used for milling grain for
survivors. It isvitally important to national recovery
and individualsurvival to get back as soonas possible
to labor-saving, mechanized ways of doing essential
work.
In an ORNL experiment, a farmer used a
John Deere Grinder-Mixer powered by a lOO-hp
tractor to grind large samples of wheat and barley.
When it is used to grind rather coarse meal for hogs,
this machine is rated at 12tons per hour. Set to grind
a finer meal-flour mixture for human consumption,
it ground both hard wheat and feed barley at a rate
of about 9 tons per hour. This is 2400 times as fast
as using muscle power to operate even the best ex-
pedient grain mill. With its finest screen installed,
this large machine can produce about 3tons of whole
wheat flour per hour.
Unlike wheat and corn, the kernels of barley,
grain sorghums, and oats have rough, fibrous hulls
that must be removed from the digestible parts to
produce an acceptable food. Moistening the grain
will toughen such hulls and make them easier to
remove. If the grain is promptly pounded orground
into meal, the toughened hulls will break into larger
pieces than will the hulls of undampened grain. A
small amount of water, weighing about 2% of the
weight of the grain, should be used to dampen the
grain. For 3 pounds of grain (about 6 cups), sprinkle
with about one ounce (28 grams, or about 2
tablespoons) of water, while stirring constantly to
moisten all the kernels. After about 5 minutes of
stirring, the grain will appear dry. The small amount
of water will have dampened and toughened the
hulls, but the edible parts'inside will have remained
dry. Larger pieces of hull are easier to remove after
grinding than smaller pieces.
One way to remove ground-up hulls from meal
is by flotation. Put some of the meal-hulls mixture
about I inch deep in a pan or pot, cover the mixture
with water, and stir. Skim off the floating hulls,
then pouroffthe waterand more hulls. Sunken pieces
of hulls that settle on top of the heavier meal can be
removed with one's fingers as the last of the water
is poured off. To produce a barley meal good for
very small children, the small pieces of hulls must
again be separated by flotation.
Figure 9.1 illustrates sieving fine, dry barley-
meal and the smaller pieces ofhulls from the coarser
Fig. 9.I. Sieving ground barleythrougha window-
screen sieve.meal and the larger pieces. The sieve was made of
a piece of window screen that measured 20 X 20
inches before its sides were folded up and wired to
form an open-topped box.
To lessen their laxative effects, all grains should
be ground as finely as possible, and most of the hulls
should be removed. 