10 additional fatal cancers will result."
These 10 fatal cancers will be in addition to
about 150 fatal cancers that normally will de-
velop among these 1,000 people during their
lifetimes. This risk is proportional to large
doses; thus, if1,000peopleeach receive a doseof
200 rems, about 20 additional lethal cancer
cases would be expected.
"Rem"isan abbreviationfor "roentgenequivalent
(in) man. ''6 The rem takes into account the biological
effects of different kinds of radiation. For external
gamma-ray radiation from fallout, the numericalvalue
of an exposure or dose given in roentgens is approxi-
mately the same as the numericalvalue given in rems or
in rads. The rad is the unit of radiation energy
absorption in any material and applies to all
kinds of nuclear radiations. Therefore, for simpli-
city's sake, this book gives both instrument readings
(exposures) and doses in roentgens (R).
The readerdesiringgood information on the long-
term and worldwide effects of radiation is referred to
two authoritative reports of the National Academy of
Sciences, Washington, D.C. 20006: The Effects on
Populations of Exposures to Low Levels ofIonizing
Radiation (The BEIR Report made by the NAS
Committee on the Biological Effects of IonizingRadiation) (November 1972); and Long-Term World-
wlae EJJectsoj "Mu)ilp)e)Vuc)ear-WeaponsDeionai'lOns
~\()l5),
From the standpoint of basic survival know-how,
these and othercomplicated scientificstudiesshowthat
to minimizelifetime risksfrom radiation, aftera
nuclear attack people should:
• Provide the best protection against radiation for
pregnant womenand youngchildren, since fetuses and
the very young are the most likely to be hurt by
radiation,
• Realize that, with the exception of lung
cancer, older people are no more susceptible to
radiation injury than are those in the prime of
life, Also, a 65-year-old probably will not live
long enough to die of a cancer that takes 20
years or more to develop, Many older people, if
they know realistic risk estimates, will choose
to do essential outdoor work and take non-
incapacitatingradiationdoses in orderto spare
younger members of their families the risk of
getting cancer decades later.
PREVENTION OF THYROID DAMAGE
FROM RADIOACTIVE IODINES
There is no medicine that will effectively prevent
nuclear radiations from damaging the human body
cells that they strike. However, a salt of the dements
potassium and iodine. taken orally even in very small
quantities I : hour to I day before radioactive iodines
are swallowed or inhaled. prevents about 99% of the
damage to the thyroid gland that otherwise would
result. The thyroid gland readily absorbs both non-
radioactive and radioactive iodine. and normally it
retains much of this element in either or both forms.
When ordinary. non-radioactive iodine is made
available in the blood for absorption by the thyroid
gland before any radioactive iodine ismade available.
the gland will absorb and retain so much that it
becomes saturated with non-radioactive iodine.
When saturated. the thyroid can absorb only about
l(i as much additional iodine. including radioactive
forms that later may become available in the blood:
then it is said to be blocked. (Excess iodine in the
blood is rapidly eliminated by the action of
the kidneys.)
An excess of ordinary iodine retained in the
thyroid gland is harmless. but quite small amounts of
radioactive iodine retained in the thyroid eventually
will give such a large rad iation dose to thyroid cells
that abnormalities are likely to result. These would
include loss of thyroid function. nodules in the
thyroid, or thyroid cancer. Sixty-four Marshall
)s)anders on /{onge)ap >"to)) were acclden'ta))y
exposed to radioactive Ia\)out produced by a large
H-bomb test explosion on Bikini Atoll. about
100 miles away. Twenty-two of them developed
thyroid abnormalities beginning nine years later." In
the two days before they were taken out ofthe fallout
area. these completely uninformed natives. living
essentially outdoors. had received estimated whole-
body gamma-ray doses of about 175 R from the
fallout all around them. 