 begin to stink badly while covered, put them
outside the shelter-still covered to keep out flies.
For some people, especially the aged, bringing a
toilet seat from home would be justified. Padding on
the edge of the bucketalso helps those who have to sit
down. An improvised seat of plywood or board
serves well.
If only one container is available and is almost
filled, periodically dump the wastes outside-unless
fallout is still being deposited. Before an anticipated
attack, people who plan to stay in a sheltershould dig
a waste-disposal pit if they do not have sufficient
waste containers for weeks of shelter occupancy. The
pit should be located about 3 feet from the shelter in
the down-wind direction. This usually will be the air
exhaust end of an earth-covered shelter. The pit
should be surrounded by a ring of mounded, packed
earth about 6 inches high, to keep surfacewater from
heavy rains from running into it.
Quickly putting or dumping wastes outside is
not hazardous once fallout is no longer being
deposited. For example, assume the shelter is in an
area of heavy fallout and the dose rate outside is
400 R/hr-enough to give a potentially fatal dose in
about an hour to a person exposed in the open. Ifa
person needs to be exposed for only 10 seconds to
dump a bucket, in this 1/360th of an hour he will
receive a dose of only about I R. Under war condi-
tions, an additional I-R dose isof little concern. Iftheshelter design does not permit an occupant to dispose
of wastes without running outside, he can tie cloth or
plastic over his shoes before going out, and remove
these coverings in the entry before going back inside
the shelter room. This precaution will eliminate the
chance of tracking "hot" fallout particles into the
shelter, and the small chance of someone getting a
tiny beta burn in this way.
• Have all occupants only urinate in the bucket,
and defecate into a piece of plastic. Urine contains
few harmful organisms and can be safely dumped
outside.
Two thicknesses ofthe thin plastic used to cover
freshly drycleaned clothes will serve to hold bowel
movements of several persons. Gather the plastic
around the excrement to form a bag-like container.
Tie the plastic closed near its upperedges with a string
or narrow strip of cloth. Do not tie it so tightly as to
be gas-tight. Each. day's collection should be gently
tossed outside. As the excrement rots, the gas will
leak out of the tied end of the plastic covering. Flies
will be attracted in swarms, but they will not be able
to get into the plastic to contaminate their feet or to
lay eggs. And because rotting excrement is so
attractive to flies, shelter occupants will be bothered
less by these dangerous pests.
If you have prudently kept a can ofmodern
fly bait in your survival supplies, a little
sprinkled on top ofthe plastic covering can kill
literally thousands of flies. The most effective
fly baits, such as Die Fly and Improved Golden
Malrin, are sold in farm supply stores.
.• Use a hose-vented, 5-gallon can or bucket lined
with a heavy plastic bag; cover tightly with plastic
when not in use. Figure 12.1 shows this type of
expedient toilet.
The vent-hose runs through a hole near the top
of the paint can shown and istaped to seal it to the
can. Such a hole can be quite easily cut with a chisel or
a sharpened screwdriver. The hose is long enough to
extend outside the shelter. Its outer end should be
secured about 6 inches aboveground level, to prevent
water from running into it during a heavy rain. When
a toilet-can is tightly covered, foul gases can escape
through the hose to the outdoors.
With its opening tied shut, a large plastic trash
bag containing as much as 30pounds of wastes can be
lifted out of a toilet-can and disposed of outside the
shelter.
The 6-member Utah family described in preced-
ing chapters used a home-like expedient toiletduring
their 77-hour shelter stay. Figure 12.2 pictures the
toilet seat they took with them, placed on a hose-
Fig. 12.1. A 5-gallon paint can used for a hose-
vented toilet-can, with a plastic trash bag for its
removable liner.
vented container in a hole in the ground. 