 add the appropriate amount of chlorine
bleach.
3. Totally immerse all utensils until the next
feeding (3 or 4 hours). Besure that the bottle, ifused,
is filled with bleach solution. Keep container
covered.
At Feeding Time
I. Wash hands before preparing food.
2. Remove utensils trom the disinfectant chlo-
rine solution and drain, but do not rinse or dry.
3. Prepare formula; feed the baby.
4. Immediately after feeding, wash utensils in
clean water and immerse again in the disinfectant
solution.
5. Prepare fresh chlorine solution each day.
STORAGE OF FOODS
Whole grains and white sugar can be stored
successfully for decades; dried beans, non-fat milk
powder, and vegetable oil can be stored for several
years. Some rules for good storage follow:
• Keep food dry. The most dependable way to
assure continuing dryness is to store dry grain in
metal containers, such as ordinary 5-gallon metal
storage cans or 55-gallon metal drums with gasketed
lids. Filled 5-gallon cans are light enough to be easily
carried in an automobile when evacuating.
Particularly in humid areas, grain which seems
to be dry often is not dry enough to store for a long
period. To be sure that grain is dry enough to store
for years, use a drying agent. The best drying agent
for this purpose is silica gel with color indicator.
The gel is blue when it is capable of absorbing water
and pink when it needs to be heated to become aneffective drying agent again. Silica gel is inexpensive if
boughtfrom chemical supply firms located in most cities.
Byheating it in a hot oven or in a can over a fireuntil it
turns blue again, silica gel can be used repeatedly for
years.
The best containers for the silica gel used to dry
grain (or to determine its dryness) are homemade cloth
envelopes large enough for a heapingcupful ofthe gel.A
clear plastic window should be stitched in, through
which color changes can be observed. Put an evelope of
silica gel on top of the grain in a 5-gallon can filled to
within a couple of inches of its top. Then close the can
tightly. Even a rather loose-fitting lid can be sealed
tightly with tape. If after a few days the silica gel is still
blue, the grain isdry enough. Ifthe silica gel has turned
pink, repeat the process with fresh envelopes until it can
be seen that the grain is dry.
• Keep grains and beans free of weevils, other insects,
and rodents. Dry ice(carbondioxide) isthe safest means·
still widely available to the public for ridding grain and
beans of insects. Place about4inches ofdry iceon top of
the grain in a 5-gallon metal container. Put the lid on
somewhat loosely, so that air in the grain can be driven
out of the can. (This willhappen as the dry icevaporizes
and the heavycarbondioxidegassinks into the grain and
displaces the air around the kernels.) After an hour or
two, tighten the lid and seal it with tape. After one
month,all insects inthiscarbon-dioxideatmosphere will
have died from lack of oxygen.
• Store foods in the coolest available place, out of the
light. Rememberthatthe storage lifeof most foods iscut
in half by an increase of 18°F (10°C) in storage
temperature.v Thus 48 months of storage at 52°F is
equivalent to 24 months at 70°F, and to 12months at
88°F.
Illustrative ofthe importance ofcool storageare my
experiences in storing non-fat milk powder in an earth-
covered, cool shelter. In steel drums I stored unopened
lOO-pound bags of compact, non-fat milk powder that I
bought from bakeries. The cost per pound wasmuch less
than I would have paid for the largest packages sold in
supermarkets. After 7 years storage at temperatures of
about 50°F the year around, my milk powder was still
good ~ as good as it would have been if stored in a
normally air-conditioned and heated home for about 3
years.
• Do not place stored metal containers directly on the
floor. To avoid possible condensation of moisture and
the rusting that results, place containers on spaced
boards. For long-term storage in damp permanent
shelters or damp basements, use solid-plasticcontainers
with thick walls.
• Rotate stored foods. 