ling clay particles willcarry most of the suspended
fallout particles to the bottom and cover them.
4. Carefully dip out or siphon the clear water,
and disinfect it.
• Settling and Filtering
Although dissolved radioactive material usually
is only a minordanger in fallout-contaminated water,
it is safest to filter even the clear water produced by
settling, if an earth filter is ayailable. Finally-as
always-the water should be disinfected.
POST-FALLOUT REPLENISHMENT
OF STORED WATER
When fallout decays enough to permit shelter
occupants to go out oftheirsheltersfor short periods,
they should try to replenish their stored water. An
enemy may make scattered nuclear strikes for weeks
afteran initial massive attack. Some survivors may be
forced backinto theirshelters by the resultant fallout.
Therefore, all available water containers should be
used to store the least contaminated water within
reach. Even without filtering, water collected and
stored shortly after the occurrence of fallout will
become increasingly safer with time, due particularly
to the rapid decay of radioactive iodines. These
would be the most dangerous contaminants of water
during the first few weeks after an attack.MINIMUM NEEDS
Chapter 9
Food
LOSS OF HIGH-PROTEIN ANIMAL FOODS
The average American is accustomed to eating
regularly and abundantly. He may not realize that
for most people food would not be essential for
survival during the first two or three weeks following
a nuclear attack. Exceptions would be infants, small
children, and the aged and sick, some of whom might
die within a week without proper nourishment. Other
things are more important for short-term survival:
adequate shelter against the dangers from blast and
fallout, an adequate supply of air, and enough
water.
The average American also may not realize that
small daily amounts of a few unprocessed staple
foods would enable him to survive for many months,
or even for years. A healthy person-s-if he is deter-
mined to live and if he learns how to prepare and
use whole-grain wheat or corn-can maintain his
health for several months. Ifbeans are also available
and are substituted for some of the grain, the ration
would be improved and could maintain health for
many months.
The nutritional information given inthis chapter
is taken from a July, 1979 publication, Maintaining
Nutritional Adequacy During a Prolonged Food
Crisis," This book brings together from worldwide
sources the nutritional facts needed to help unpre-
pared people use unaccustomed foods advanta-
geously during the prolonged crisis that would follow
a heavy nuclear attack. The practical know-how
which will be given in this chapter regarding the
expedient processing and cooking of basic grains
and beans is based on old ways which are mostly
unknown to modern Americans. These methods have
been improved and field-tested by civil defense
researchers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
A mass-ive nuclear attack would eliminate the
luxurious, complicated American system of food
production, processing, and distribution. Extensive,
heavy fallout and the inability of farmers to feed
their animals would kill most of the cattle, hogs, and
chickens that are, the basis of our high-protein diet.
The livestock most likely to survive despite their
owners' inability to care for them would be cattle on
pasture. However, these grazing animals would
swallow large numbers of fallout particles alongwith
grass, and many would drink contaminated water.
Their digestive tracts would suffer severe radiation
damage." Also, they would suffer radiation burns
from fallout particles. Thus in an outdoorareawhere
the total dose from gamma radiation emitted within
a fewdays from fallout particles on the ground might
be only 150 R, most grazing animals probably would
be killed by the combined effects of external gamma-
ray radiation, beta burns, and internal radiation."
PRECAUTIONS WHEN EATING MEAT
In areas where the fallout would not be enough
to sicken animals, their meat would be safe food. In
fallout areas, however, animals that have eaten or
drunk fallout-contaminated food or water will have
concentrated radioactive atoms and molecules in
their internal organs. The thyroid gland, kidneys,
and liver especially should not be eaten.
If an animal appears to be sick, it should not be
eaten. The animal might be sufferingfrom a sickening
or fatal radiation dose and might have developed a
bacterial infection as a result of this dose. Meat
contaminated with the toxins produced by some
kinds of bacteria could cause severe illness or death
if eaten, even if thoroughly cooked.