elterhastwo ventilation systems:
• The primary ventilation system of a small
permanent shelter should utilize a manually
operated centrifugal blower, or a homemade
Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump. (See Ap-
pendix E.) A satisfactory air pump must be
capable of supplying adequate outdoor air
through an air-intake pipe, a filter, and an air-
exhaustpipe. (See Figs. 17.1and 17.2.)"Adequate
outdoorair"for a smallsheltermeans atleast 15
cubicfeet perminuteperoccupantfor the cooler
partsofthe United States,andatleast30 cfm per
occupant in, most of the country. Most per-
manent shelters have centrifugal blowers that
can notdeliver an adequate volume ofairinhot
weather for each planned occupant.
For a medium sized permanent shelter,
installing two or more manually powered air
pumps is both mor~ dependable and more eco-
nomicalthan providinganemergencygenerator
and its engine to supply power to an electric
blower. The Swiss, who have made the world's
bestand mostexpensive percapitapreparations
to survive a war, use one or more hand-cranked
centrifugal blowers to ventilate most of their
shelters.
• The multi-week and/or emergency ventila-
tion system of a permanent shelter that has an
emergency exit should depend on a homemade
KAP, made before a crisis and kept readyto use.
(See Appendix B, How to Make and Use a
HomemadeShelter-VentilatingPump,theKAP.)
Byopeningboththeentrance andtheemergency
exit, the shelter is provided withtwo large,low-
resistance openings through which a KAP can
pump large volumes of air with minimum
work.
Warning: Keep screen doors and/or screen
panels ready to protect all openings againstthe
swarmsof flies and mosquitoeslikelytobecome
dangerous pests in fallout areas. UseyourKAP
to pump adequate air through screens. Insect
screens greatly reduce natural ventilation, as
the author first noted in Calcutta while a bed-
ridden patient in a stifling hot ward of a hastily
constructed Armyhospital. Becausethere were
no fans or blowers to pump in outdoor air or
circulate the air inside, window screens were
openedinthedaytimewhenmalariamosquitoes
werenotflying. Thedoctors correctlyconcluded
thatthe temperaturereduction when the screens
were opened helped the patients more than they
were endangered by the entering filthy flies.
Adequate ventilation is more important than
protection from flies, butwith a KAP and insect
screens you can have both. Flies, mosquitoes,
and other insects can be killed very effectively
by occasionally spraying or painting screens
and other alighting surfaces with water solu-
tions of insecticides containing permithin and
sold in many farm stores.
ADVICE ON VENTILATION
OPENINGS AND FITTINGS
• Install ventilation pipes large enough to
reduce resistancetoairflow, thusincreasingthe
volumeofairthattheshelter'spumpcandeliver.
A shelter with a 200-cfm pump (such as the
homemakeable Plywood Double-Action Piston
Pump described in Appendix E) should have
5-inch galvanized steel pipe. The pumps that
are installed in most family shelters deliver
only about 100 cfm or less. Four-inch pipe is
adequate for use with pumps this small, pro-
vided that the pipes have no more than two
right-angle turns below each gooseneck. (A 90-
degree L gives about as much resistance to
airflow as 12 feet of straight pipe.)
• Make and installa gooseneckwith itsmouth
abouttwicethediameterofthe pipe, as indicated
in Fig. 17.1. The purpose of such a gooseneck is
to preventmoreofthe largerdescendingfallout
particles from being pumped or blown into the
shelter. For example, if 200 cfm of air is being
pumped into a shelt~r through a gooseneck of
5-inch-diameter pipe with its mouth also 5
inchesindiameter,the velocityofthe air up into
the mouth of the gooseneck is about 1,440 feet
per minute, and sand-like spherical particles
smaller than approximately 500 microns in
diameteralso are "sucked" Up.