 hear, or see
fallout radiation. A heavyattack would put most radio
stations offthe air, due to the effectsofelectromagnetic
pulse, blast, fire, or fallout from explosions. Because
fallout intensitiesoftenvarygreatlyovershortdistances,
those stationsstill broadcastingwould rarely beable to
give reliable information concerning the constantly
changingradiationdangersaround asurvivor'sshelter.
Which parts ofthe shelter givethe best protection?
How large isthe radiation dose being received byeach
person? When is it safe to leave the shelter for a few
minutes? When can one leavefor an hour's walk to get
desperately needed water? As the fallout continues to
decay, how long can one safely work each day outside
the shelter? When can the shelter beleftfor good? Only
an accurate, dependable fallout meter will enable
survivors to answer these life-or-death questions'.
Gamma radiation is by far the most dan-
gerous radiation given off by fallout particles.
Gamma rays are like X rays, only more pene-
tratingandharmful.Theroentgen(R) istheunit
most commonly used to measure exposures to
gamma rays, or to X rays, and most American
civil defense instruments give readings in
roentgens (R) or roentgens per hour (R/hr).
Therefore, for simplicity's sake, in this book
almostallradiationdoses are given inroentgens
(R), and radiation dose rates are given in
roentgens per hour (R/hr). This simplification
is justified because, for external whole-body
gamma radiation from fallout, the numerical
valueofanexposure ordose given in roentgens
is approximately the same. as the numerical
value-given in rems or rads. (For information
on the rem and the rad, and on the seriousness
and probability of injuries likely to be suffered
as a result of receiving different sized doses of
gamma radiation, see "Lifetime Risks from
Radiation", a section of Chapter 13.)
The dose (the quantity) of radiation that a
person receives, along with the length of time
during which the dose is received, determine
what injuries, if any, will be suffered as a result
of the dose. Of people who, in a few days, each
receive a dose of 350 roentgens under nuclear
war conditions, about half will die. Doses are
measuredwith smallinstrumentscalleddosim-
eters,eitherbydirectlyreadingthedosebetween
the time atwhich a dosimeteris chargedtoread
zero andthe time of a subsequentreading, orby
calculatingbysubtractionthedose betweentwo
readings. However, to avoid receiving a lethal
orsickeningdose,themostusefulinstrumentis
a dose rate meter. The National Academy of
Sciences'AdvisoryCommitteeon CivilDefense
in 1953 concluded: "The final effectiveness of
shelter depends upon the occupants of any
shelter having simple, rugged, and reliable
doseratemeterstomeasurethefalloutdoserate
outside the shelter."
With a reliable dose rate meter you can
quite quicklydeterminehowgreattheradiation
dangersareindifferentplaces,andthenprompt-
ly act to reduce your exposure to these unseen,
unfelt dangers. For example, if you go outside
anexcellentfallout shelterandlearnbyreading
yourdose rate meterthatyouarebeingexposed
to 30 R/hr, you know that if you stay there for
one hour you will receive a dose of 30 R. But if
you gobackinsideyourexcellentshelterafter2
minutes, then while outside you will have re-
ceived a dose of only 1R. (2 minutes =2/60 of anhour=1/30hr; andreceivinga dose attherateof
30 R/hr for 1/30 hr results in a dose of 30 R/hr x
1/30 hr = lR.) Under nuclear war conditions,
receiving an occasional dose of lR (1,000 milli-
roentgens) would be of little concern, as ex-
plained in Chapter 13 and 18.
WARNINGS FOR BUYERS OF
FALLOUT METERS
You are "on your own" when buying a dose
rate meter or dosimeter because:
• No U.S. 