 Afterthe arch isformed,
the only weight that the yielding roofsupports isthe
weight of the small thickness of earth between the
roof and the bottom of the arch.
Protective earth archingalso results ifa shelteris
covered with a material that compresses when
loaded, or if the whole roof or the whole shelter can
be pushed down a little without being broken.
ORNl·DWG 78·7441
1 It
Fig. 5.7. Earth arching over a yielding roof enables a shelter to withstand much greater pressures.SHELTER AGAINST BETA AND
ALPHA PARTICLES
In addition to the invisible, light-like gamma
rays, fallout particles radiate two types of hazardous
invisible particles: beta and alpha particles. These
radiations would be minor dangers to informed
people in fallout areas, especially to those who had
entered almost any kind ofshelter before the fallout
began to be deposited in their area.
• Beta particles are high-speed electrons given off
by some of the radioactive atoms in fallout. Only the
highest-energy beta particlescan penetrate more than
about 10feet ofairor about I/Xinch of water, wood, or
human body tissue. Any building that keeps out
fallout particles will prevent injury from beta radia-
tion.
The only frequently serious dangers are from (I)
internal beta-radiation doses from fallout-
contaminated food or drink, and (2) beta burns from
fresh fallout particles. Fresh fallout particles are no
more than a few days old and therefore very
radioactive. If fresh particles remain: for at least
several tens of minutes in contact with the skin, beta
burns are likely to result. If only thin clothing
separates fresh fallout particles from the skin, a
considerably longer time will elapse before their
radiation causes beta burns.
In dry, windy weather, fresh fallout particles
might get inside one's nose and ears, along with dust
and sand, and could cause beta burns ifnot promptly
washed off or otherwise removed.
Prompt washing will prevent beta burns. If
water .is not available, brushing and rubbing the
fallout particles off the skin will help.
If a person is exposed outdoors where there is
heavy, fresh fallout for a long enough time to receive'
a large dose of gamma radiation, the highest-energy
beta radiation given off by fresh fallout particles on
the ground may be a relatively minor danger to his
eyes and skin. Even ordinary glasses give good
protection to the eyes against such beta radiation,
and ordinary clothing gives good protection to the
skin.
Ordinary clothing will shield and protect the
body quite well from all but the highest-energy beta
particles given off by fresh fallout deposited on the
clothing. Fallout-contaminated clothing should be
removed as soon as practical, or at least brushed and
beaten before entering a shelter room, to rid it of as
many fallout particles as possible. (Fallout particles
that are many days old will not cause beta burns
unless large quantities are on the body for hours.)
Most of the knowledge about beta burns on
human skin was gathered as a result of an accident
during the largest U.S. H-bomb test in the tropical
Pacific." Winds blew the fallout in a direction not
anticipated by the meteorologists. Five hours after
the multimegaton surface burst, some natives of the
Marshall Islands noticed a white powder beginning
to be deposited on everything exposed, including
their bare, moist skin. Unknown to them, the very
small particles were fresh fallout. (Most fallout is
sand-like, but fallout from bursts that have cratered
calcareous rock, such as coral reefs and limestone, is
powdery or flakey, and white.) Since the natives knew
nothing about fallout, they thought the white dust
was ashes from a distant volcanic eruption. For two
days, until they were removed from their island
homes and cared for by doctors, they paid practically
no attention to the white dust. Living inthe open and
in lightly constructed homes, they received from the
fallout all around them a calculated gamma-ray dose
ofabout 175 R in the two days they were exposed.
The children played in the fallout-contaminated
sand. The fallout on these islanders' scalps, bare
necks, and the tops of their bare feet caused itching
and burning sensations after a time. Days later, beta
burns resulted, along with extreme discoloration of
the skin. Beta burns are not deep burns; however, it
took weeks to heal them. Some, in spite of proper
medical attention, developed into ulcers. (No serious
permanent skin injury resulted, however.