over 1000 hours of full-stroke pumping, without
having their edges reinforced. Lowerflaps made of6-
mil nylon-reinforced polyethylene, without edge
reinforcements, have lasted for 1000hours with only
minor damage.
To prevent a filter used with a KAP from
causing too greata reduction in the volume ofair that
the KAP can pump through your shelter, you must
use large areas of low-resistance filter material. An
example: In one ventilation test, a large basement
shelter was used which had two ordinarydoorways at
its oppositeends. These served as itsair-intakeand its
air-exhaust openings. A 72X 29in. KAP operating in
one doorway pumped almost 5000 cubic feet per
minute through the shelter. But when a filter frame
holding 26 square feet of l-in-thick fiberglass dust
filters was placed across the air-intake stairwell, the
KAP could pump only about 3400 cfm through this
filter and the shelter.
The best pulley tested was a marine pulley such
as that used on small sailboats, with a Delrin
(DuPont) 2-in.-diameter wheel and J/win. stainless
steel shaft. This pulley was undamaged after
operating a 6-ft KAP for 324 hours. The pulley
appeared to be good for hundr~ds of hours offurther
operation.
The best pulley-cords tested were of braided
dacron or nylon.APPENDIX C
A HOMEMADE FALLOUT METER, THE KFM
HOW TO MAKE AND USE IT
FOLLOWING THESE INSTRUCTIONS MAY SAVE YOUR LIFE
z
~z
CIl
'J
~
-
The complete KFM instructions include patterns to be cut out and used to construct the fallout
meter. At the end of the instructions are extra patterns on 4 unnumbered pages. The reader is
urged to use these extra patterns to make KFM''s in normal peacetime and to keep the complete
instructions intact for use during a recognized crisis period.
If Xerox copies of the patterns are used, they should be checked against the originals in
order to make sure that they are the same size as the originals. Some older copiers make
copies with slightly enlarged dimensions. Even slightly enlarged copies of all the KFM
patterns can be made satisfactory provided: (1) on the PAPER PATTERN TO WRAP
AROUND KFM CAN, the distances between the 4 marks for the HOLES FOR STOP-
THREAD are corrected; and (2) the dimensions of the FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN are
corrected.
These instructions, including the heading on this page and the illustrative photos, can be photographed
without additional screening and rapidly reproduced by a newspaper or printer. If you keep the KFM
instructions intact, during a worsening crisis you will be able to use them to help your friends and
thousands of your fellow citizens by making them available for reproduction. tv
--<.,;JoCJo.....J
-..-
-
0)
a..I. The Need for Accurate and Dependable Fallout Meters
Ifa nuclear war ever strikes the United States, survivors of the blast and fire effects
would needto havereliablemeans of knowing whenthe radiation intheenvironment
around their shelters had dropped enough to let them venture safely outside. Civil
defense teams could use broadcasts of surviving radio stations to give listeners a
general idea of the fallout radiation in some broadcast areas. However, the fallout
radiation can vary widelyfrom point to point and the measurements are likelyto be
made too far from most shelters to make them accurate enough to use safely.
Therefore, each shelter should have some dependable method of measuring the
changing radiation dangers in its own area.
During a possible rapidly worsening nuclear crisis, or after a nuclear attack, most
unprepared Americans could not buy or otherwise obtain a fallout meter -- an
instrument that would greatly improve their chances ofsurvivinga nuclear war. The
fact that the dangers from fallout radiation- bestexpressed interms ofthe radiation
dose rate, roentgens per hour (RI hr) -- quite rapidly decrease during the first few
days, and then decrease more and more slowly, makes it very important to have a
fallout metercapable ofaccurately measuring the unseen, unfeltand changing fallout
dangers. Occupants ofafallout shelter should beable to minimizethe radiationdoses
they receive. 