 avoid the extra work of diggingamong roots,
select a site away from trees, if practical.
8. To lessen the dangers of fire and smoke from
nearby houses or trees that might catch fire,
locate your shelter as far as is practical from
houses and flammable vegetation.
9. Before staking out your shelter, provide one door
per person to roof the main room plus one
additional door for each of the two entries. Be
sure the door knobs have been removed. Use the
two widest doors to roof the entries.
10. To be sure that all the walls will be in the proper
positions to be roofed with the available doors,
lay all the doors on the ground, touching each
other and in the same relative positions they will
have when used to roofthe shelter. When all the
roof doors are on the ground, side by side,
determine the exact length of the shelter room.
(Note that Fig. A.4 illustrates a shelter sized for
only 4 persons.)
11. Stake out the shelter.
12. Make the earth-filled "rolls" that will form the
aboveground walls of your shelter. To make
walls out' of the rolls:
(I) Use doors as vertical forms to hold the
earth-filled rolls in place until the walls are
completed. (These are the same doors that
you will use later to roof the shelter.)
(2) Brace the door-forms with 36-in.-Iong
braces (boards or sticks) that press against
the doors, as shown in Fig. AA. Nail only
the upper braces, using only very small
nails.
(3) After the forms for the two inner sides of the
shelter have been finished, put parts of the
long sides of bedsheets on the ground, as
illustrated. (Or use other equally wide,
strong cloth or plastic material.) About a 2-
ft width of cloth should be on the ground,
and the rest of each sheet should be folded
up out of the way, over the outsides of the
door-forms. Adjacent sheetsshould overlap
about 1ft when making a roll than islonger
than one sheet.
(4) Shovel earth onto the parts of the sheet on
the ground to the height of the rolls you are
making, as shown. Note that the roll to be
made on one side is2in. higherthan the roll
on the other side.
(5) Shape the surface of the shoveled-on earth
as illustrated, to hold the "hooks" of cloth
to be formed when the exposed sides of the
sheets are folded down.
(6) Fold down the upper side of each sheet
while pulling on it to keep it tight and
without wrinkles. It should lie on theprepared earth surface, including the small
narrow trench, as illustrated in the first
section of this appendix.
(7) Pack earth onto the partofthe folded-down
sheet that is in the narrow, shallow trench.
Then, as shown in the sketches at the
bottom of the accompanying drawing, fold
back the loose edge over this small amount
of packed earth to form a "hook." (The
hook keeps the weight of the earth inside a
roll from pulling the cloth out of its proper
position.)
(8) Make a roll first on one side of the shelter,
then on the other, to keep the heights of the
earth on both sides of the shelter about
equal. This will keep the unequal heights of
earth from pushing the door-forms out of
their vertical positions.
(9) Add additional earth on top of the rolls so
that the height ofthe level earthsurface, out
to the full width of a roll, isthe same as the
height of the cloth-covered part of the roll
that is against the door-form.
(10) When the roll walls have been raised to their
planned heights on both sides ofthe shelter,
remove the braces and the door-
forms-being careful to keep the brace nails
from damaging the doors.
(II) The door-forms of the side-walls of the
shelter can be removed before building the
end-walls.
13. When smoothing the earth surfaces of the final
tops of the roll walls on both sides, check to see
that they have the sameslopeas the lowersides of
the roof doors will have after they are placed on
the roll walls. (A slope is necessary so that
rainwater reaching the waterproofcovering to be
placed over the doors will run offthe lower side.)
Study Fig. AA.
14. 