29-in. boards and call it
the top.) If you do not have a drill
for drilling a screw hole, you can
make a hole by driving a nail and
then pulling it out. Screw the
screw into the nail hole.
NOTE HINGES ARE ON
THE FAR (= THE FRONT)
SIDE OF FRAME
Fig. 4. Completing the frame.
3. The pivot-wires and flaps
a. Make 9 flap pivot-wires. Ifyou have smooth,
straight wire as springy and thick as coat hangerwire,
use it to make nine 29-in.-long straight lengths of
wire. Ifnot. use wire from all-wire coat hangers or use
strings. First, cut off all of the hook portion of each
coat hanger, including the twisted part. If you have
only ordinary pliers, use the cutter to "bite" the wire
all around; it will break at this point if bent there.
'>ext. straighten each wire carefully. Straighten all
the bends so that each wire isstraight within '/4 in., as
compared to a straight line. Proper straightening
takes I to S minutes per wire. To straighten,
repeatedly grasp the bent part of the wire with pliers
in slightly different spots, each time bending the wire
a little with vour other hand. Then cut each wire to a
29-in. length. Finally, bend no more than 1/2 in. of
each end at a right angle and in the same plane-that
is. in directions so that all parts of the bent wire will
lieflat against a smooth surface. The bent ends are for
secure attachment later (see Fig. 8).
b. Make 9 polyethylene flaps that will be the
hinged valves of the KAP. First 'cut 9 strips,
making each strip 30 in. long by SI/2-in. wide (see
Fig. S). To cut plastic flaps quickly and accurately,
cut a long strip of plastic 30 in. wide. Then cut off a
flap in this way: (I) draw a cutting guideline on a
wide board SI/2 in. from an edge; (2) place the
30-in.-wide plastic strip so that it lies on this board,
with one of the strip's side edges just reaching the
edge of the board; (3) place a second board over
ORNL OWG 71-1004A
Fig, 5.the plastic on the first board, with a straight edge
of this second upper board over the guideline on
the lower board; and finally (4) cut off a flap by
running a sharp knife along the straight edge of the
upper board.
To form a hem along one of the 30-in. sides of
a 51h X 30-in. rectangular strip, fold in a l-in. hem.
This makes the finished flap 41h in. wide.
To hold the folded hem while taping it, paper
clips or another pair of hands are helpful. For each
hem, use two pieces of pressure-sensitive tape, each
about I in. wide and 16 in. long. Or make the hem
by sewing it very close to the cut edge to form a
hem-tunnel" (see Fig. 5).
After the hem has been made, cut a notch with
scissors in each hemmed corner of the flap (Figs. 6
and 8). Avoid cutting the tape holding the hem.
Each notch should extend downward about 1/2 in.
and should extend.horizontally from the outer edge
of the flap to 1/4 in. inside the inner side of the
frame, when the flap is positioned on the frames as
shown in Fig. 6.
QRNL-DWG 66-12324
BRACE
Fig. 6. Sizes of notches in flaps.
Also cut a notch in the center of the flap
(along the hem line) extending 1/2 in. downward
and extending horizontally 1/4 in. beyond each of
the two sides of the vertical brace (see Fig. 6). The
notch MUST be wider than the brace. [However, if
you are building a pump using wire netting for
flap-stops (see Fig. 13), then do NOT cut a notch in
the center of each flap.]
c. Take the 9 pieces of straightened wire and
insert one of them into and through the hem-tunnel
of each flap, like a curtain rod running through the
hem of a curtain. Check to see that each flap
swings freely on its pivot-wire, as illustrated by Fig.
