 40 inches
wide by 9 feet long along its center line, with
each of its long sides being 8 feet-4 inches long.
At each end is a curved hem 31/2 inches wide,
through which a loop-ended nylon hammock
rope is run, to draw the slung hammock into a
boat-like, secure shape with adequate head and
shoulder room. The breaking strength of a
hammock rope should be at least 600 pounds.
To attach the nylon ropes that-support the
suspended chair's two "arms," a loop of nylon
webbing, or of folded and stitched nylon cloth,
shouldbe sewnto eachsideedgeof thehammock
52 inches from the end of the hammockthatwill
serve as the top of the back of the chair. See the
illustrations on page 124. Especially in per-
manent family shelters, support points both for
the hammocks, and for the hammocks when
they areconvertedintosuspendedchairs, should
be made when the shelter is being built.
OFTEN OVERLOOKED SANITATION
AND OTHER SHELTER NEEDS
Storeenoughsoaptolastyourfamily for at
least a year. After a major nuclear attack the
edible fats and oils, used in past generations to
make soap, will almost all be eaten. Production
of detergents is based on inter-dependent, vul-
nerable chemical industries not likely to be
restored for years.
A chemicaltoiletwouldhelpbridgethegap
between modern living and surviving in a
crowded shelter. For months-long occupancy,
however, a more practicaltoilet is likelyto be a
5-gallon can with a seat, a plastic trash bagfor
its removableliner, a pieceofplasticfilmforits
tie-on cover, and a hose to vent gasses to the
outdoors. See page 104. Store at least 200 large
plastic trash bags.
The author knows from his experiences in
primitive regions that using anything other
than paper in place of toilet paper or cloth is
hard to get accustomed to. A hundred pounds of
newspaper, stored in plastic trash bags to pre-
ventitfrom gettingdamp,takesuponly about3
cubic feet of storage space and would be useful
for many purposes.
Keep several thousand matches, in Mason
jars, so that they will be sure to stay dry even if
your shelter becomes very humid post-attack.
Store most of your radiation monitoring
instruments in your shelter, along with paper
and pencils with which to keep records of
radiation exposures, etc. A steel or reinforced
concrete shelter should have a transistor radio
withextrabatteries,anda verticalpipethrough
which an antenna can be run up to improve
reception.
No one can remember all the needed sur-
vival facts and instructions given even in this
one book, so keep Nuclear War Survival Skills and
other survival guidance in your shelter, and
also other books that you believe may improve
your family's morale and survival chances.·
PRACTICE SHELTER LIVING
A familythat spends a weekendlivinginits
completed small shelter will learn more about
unrecognized shelter needs - and more about
eachother- thanmembers arelikelytolearnif
they all read civil defense information for two
whole days. Furthermore,afterthiseducational
experience family members oldenough to have
nuclear fears will know for sure that anti-
defense activists are talking nonsense when
they maintain that ifmost Americans had shel-
ters they would become less heedful of nuclear
wardangers andmorelikelytosupportaggres-
sive leaders.Chapter 18
Trans-Pacific Fallout
POTENTIAL DANGERS TO AMERICANS
Many strategists believe that if a nuclear
warisfought inthenextfew decadesitprobably
will not involve nuclear explosions on any of
our 50 states. Perhaps the first nuclear war
casualties inthe UnitedStates willbe causedby
fallout from an overseas nuclear war in which
our country is not a belligerent. As the number
of nations with nuclear weapons increases -
especially in the Middle East - this generally
unrecognizeddangertoAmericans willworsen.
Trans-Pacific warfallout, carriedto anAmerica
at peace by the prevailing west-to-east winds
that blow around the world, could be several
hundred times more dangerous to Americans
than fallout from the worst possible overseas
nuclearpowerreactoraccident, andmanytimes
more dangerous than fallout from a very im-
probableU.S. 