 shelter, place loose loops around roof
poles in the approximate locations given by the
diagram on the second shelter drawing, Fig.
A.2.2. Make these loose loops of rope, or strong
wire, or 16-in-wide strips of strong cloth, such as
501;( polyester bedsheet rolled up to form a
"rope". (For making hammocks and seats, see
Chapter 14. These are not essential, although
decidedly useful.)
18. Cover the cracks between the logs with cloth,
leaves, clay, or any other material that will keep
dirt from falling down between the cracks.
CAUTION: DO NOT try to rainproof this flat
roof, and then simply cover it with earth. Water
will seep through the loose earth cover, puddle
on the flat roofing material, and leak through the
joints between pieces of roofing material or
through small holes.
19. Place 6-ft-long poles. one on top of the other.
next to the entrances. This will keep earth to be
placed on top of the entryway trenches from
falling into the openings. Secure these poles with
wire or rope. (See View A_AI in Fig. A.2.l.) If
wire or rope is not available, make earth-filled
"rolls" to hold the earth nearly vertical on the
trench roof next to each opening. (See the
introductory section of this appendix.)
20. Mound earth to a center depth of about 18 in.
over the shelter roof (as shown in View B_BI in
Fig. A.2.!) to form the surface of the future
"buried roof." Be sure to slope both sides of the
mound. Then smooth its surface and remove
sharp roots and stones that might puncture thin
rainproofing materials to be placed upon it.
21. Place the waterproofing material on the "buried
roof." If small pieces must be used, lay them in
shingle-like fashion, starting at the lower sides of
the mounded earth.
22. Cover the buried roof with another 18 in. of
mounded earth, and smooth this final earth
surface.
23. Finish the entrances by placing some shorter
poles between the two longer poles next to each
entryway. Bank and pack earth at least 6 in. deep
around the sides of the entrances, so that
rainwater on the ground cannot run into the
shelter entrances.
24. Dig surface drainage ditches around the outside
of the mounded earth and around the entrances.
25. Place a piece of water-shedding material over
each of the entrances, forming an open-ended
canopy to keep fallout and rain from the shelter
openings. (See Fig. A in the introductory section
of Appendix A.) Almost all fallout would settle
on these suspended canopies, rather than falling
into shelter openings-or would fall off their
edges and onto the ground like sand.
26. Hangthe KAP from the roofof the trench opening
into which outdoor air can be felt flowing, so that
air will be pumped in the direction of the natural
flow of air. (If you have no KAP, make and
use a small Directional Fan.)
27. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed- with available materials. If possible, disin-
fect all water stored in expedient containers, using
one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, such as
Clorox, for each 10gallons of water. Even if only
muddy water is available, store it. If you do not
have a disinfectant, it may be possibleto boil water'
when needed.
28. Put all of your emergency tools inside your
shelter.
29. As timeand materials permit, continue to improve
your chances ofsurviving by doing as many ofthe
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemade fallout meter,as described
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Makeand hangexpedient bedsheet-hammocks
and bedsheet-chairs, following the installation
diagram shown in Fig. A.2.2.
(3) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the air is pumped through with a
KAP.
(4) Dig a stand-up hole near the far end of the
shelter. Make the hole about 15in. 