 the reading taken after exposure;
3. reading the KFM after its exposure;
Instructions on how to use a KFM are given after those detailing how to make and
charge this fallout meter.
S. using this table to find what the dose rate was during the exposure -- as will be
described later.
~
..
~::>..
...\
SCALE
CHAJIlGEDKFM
j
ELECTROSTATICALLY
CHARGED PLASTIC
OR TAPE
.,- SPARIl; GAP ~ CAN (COVER IS
NOT SHOWN)
A KFM isa simple electroscope-ionizationchamber
fallout meter with which fallout radiation can be mea-
sured accurately. To use a KFM, an electrostatic charge
must first be placed on its two separate aluminum-foil
leaves. These leaves are insulated by being suspended
separately on clean, dry insulating threads.
To take accurate readings. the air inside a KFM must
be kept very dry by means of drying agents such as
dehydrated gypsum (easily made by heating gypsum
wallboard. "sheetrock") or silica gel. (Do not use
calcium chloride or other saIt.) Pieces of drying agent
are placed on the bottom of the ionization chamber
(the housing can) of a KFM.
When the two KFM leavesare charged electrostatically, their likecharges (both positive
or both negative) cause them to be forced apart. When fallout gamma radiation (that is
similar to X rays but more energetic) strikes the air inside the ionization chamber of a
KFM. itproduces charged ions inthisenclosed air. Thesecharged ionscause part or allof
the electrostatic charge on the aluminum-foil leavesto bedischarged. Asa result of losing
charge. the two KFM leaves move closer together.
A KFM-maker who wants visual proof that his instrument can be partially or wholly
discharged by ionizing radiation should persuade his dentist to place the charged KFM
about 20 inches directly below a typical dental X-ray
machine. For example, when a typical 90 kvp machine was
set at 15 milliamps and for a 1/20th second pulse. its
columnated X-ray beam partially discharged the KFM's
separated aluminum-foil leaves. promptly reducing the
initial reading of 15mm to 9 mm. Other types of machines
willrequire different settings. Many dental X-ray machines
are not accurately calibrated, nor do they produce gamma
rays.sosuch tests should not beused inan attempt to check
the accuracy of a KFM.
CLEAR
I PL.ASTIC
To read the separation of the lower edges of the two ~.COVER
KFM leaves with one eye. look straight down on the SEAT
leaves and the scale on the clear plastic cover. Keep - ~c _::".
the reading eye 12 inches above the SEAT. The KFM ~,.- ..,.---c'
should be resting on a horizontal surface. To be sure the reading eye is always at
this exact distance. place the lower end of a 12·inch ruler on the SEAT, while the
upper end of the ruler touches the eyebrow above the reading eye. It is best to
hold the KFM can with one hand and the ruler with the other. Using a flashlight
makes the reading more accurate.C>o,
C>o,To get a clearer idea of the construction and use of a KFM, look carefully at the
following photos and read their captions.
IV
0-,
z
~::0
c::
Bozen
1
(ll
.,..
For accurate radiation
measurements, a KFM
should be placed on an
approximately horizontal
surface, but the charges
on its two leaves and
their displacements do
not have to be equal.
NOTE: In these photos, the paper scale is taped to the top of the
transparentplastic-filmcover. Itisbettertotapethe scaleto
the under side of the cover, where it is less likely to be
damaged.
D. Reading a KFM. A 12-
inch ruler rests on the
SEAT and is held vert-
ical, while the reader's
eyebrow touches the
upper end of the ruler.
The lower edge of the
right leaf is under 8 on
the scale and the lower
edge of the left leaf is
under 6 on the scale,
giving a KFM reading of
14.
Also note the SEAT, a
piece of pencil taped to
the right side of the can,
opposite the charging
wire. .
C. A Charged KFM. 