 slightly salted water:
about I teaspoon (~.5 grn) of salt per quart (or liter),
preferably chilled. in amounts of I to 3 liters
daily. "]
• Broken bones: Apply simple splints to keep the
bones from moving. Do not worry about deformities;
most can be corrected later by a doctor. Do not
attempt traction setting of broken bones.
• Shock: Keep the victim warm. Place blankets or
other insulation material under him. Do not cover
him with so many blankets that he sweats and suffers
harmful tluid losses. Give him plenty ofslightly salted
water [about a teaspoon of salt in a liter (or quart)
of water].
• Heat prostration: Give adequate fluids. includ-
ing slightly salty water.
• Simple childbirth: Keep hands off. Wait until the
mother has given birth. Do not tie and cut the cord
unless a potent disinfectant is available. Instead, use
the primitive practice of wrapping the cord and the
placenta around the infant until they dry. Avoid the
risk of infecting the mother by removing the rest of
the afterbirth: urge the mother to work to expel it.
• Toothache: Do not attempt to pull an aching
tooth. Decaying teeth will abscess and fall out. This is
a painful but seldom fatal process---one which was
endured by most of our remote ancestors who
reached maturity.
VETERINARIAN ANTIBIOTICS
People who for decades have used antibiotics to
combat their infections have not produced normal
quantities of antibodies. and have subnormal
resistance to many infections. People who have not
been dependent on antibiotics have these antibodies.
In the aftermath of a massive nuclear attack, most
sun iving Americans would be in rural areas; many
would need antibiotics. A large part of their need
could be met by the supplies of veterinarian
antibiotics kept on livestock and chicken farms, at
feed mills, and in small towns. Many animals are
given more antibiotics in their short lives than most
Americans receive in theirs. Hogs, for example, are
given antibiotics and; or other disease-controlling
medicines in their feed each day. In many farming
areas, veterinary antibiotics and other medicines are
in larger supply than are those for people. Realistic
preparations to survive an all-out attack should
include utilizing these supplies.
RADIATION SICKNESS
For the vast majority of Americans who would
receive radiation doses from a massive attack, the help
ofcoacts.antibioticg, blood usnaanom.cu; wou}d
not be of life-or-death importance. Very few of those
receiving acute doses (received within 24 hours) of less
than 100 R would become sick, even briefly. All of
thoseexposed to acute doses between 100Rand 200 R
should recover from radiation effects." However,
underpost-attackconditionsofmultiple stresses
andprivations, somewhoreceive acuteradiation
doses of 100 R to 200 R may die ofinfectious dis-
eases becauseoftheir reduced resistance. Iftotal
doses this size or even several times larger are received
overa period of a few months in small doses ofaround
6 R per day, no incapacitatingsymptoms should result.
The human body usually can repair almost all radiation
damage if the daily doses are not too large.
The majority of those with acute doses oflessthan
about 350 R will recover without medical treatment.
Almost all of those receiving acute doses of over 600 R
would die within a few weeks, even if they were to
receive treatment in a typical hospital during
peacetime. Ifall doctorsand the equipmentand drugs
needed for heroic treatments magically were to survive
an attack - and persons suffering from radiation
sickness could reach them - relatively few additional
lives could besaved.
The most effective way to reduce losses ofhealth
and life from radiation sickness is to prevent
excessive exposure to radiation. Adequate shelter
and essential life-support items are the best means of
saving lives in a nuclear war. The following informa-
tion on radiation sickness is given to help the reader
understand the importance of building a good shelter
and to help him distinguish between symptoms of
common illnesses and first symptoms of radiation
sickness.
The first symptoms of radiation sickness are
nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, and a generalfeeling of illness." These symptoms begin several
hours after exposure to acute doses of 100R to 200 R,
and within 30 minutes or less after receiving a fatal
dose. 