 in the plastic flaps.
before had attempted to build a novel device of any
kind to make serviceable air pumps.
(The air pump instructions given in Appendix B
repeat some information in this chapter. This
repetition is included both to help the readerwhen he
starts to build an air pump and to increase the
chances of the best available complete instructions
being given to local newspapers during some future
crisis. The instructions given in this book could be
photographed. reproduced, and mass-distributed by
newspapers.)
Figure 6.2shows (behind the girl) a 20-inch-wide
by 36-inch-high KAP installed in the entry trench ofa
trench shelter. The father of the Utah family
described earlier had made this simple pump at
home, using only materials and tools found in many
homes-as described in Appendix B. He carried the
pump on top of his car to the shelter-building site.
The pendulum-like, flap-valve pump was swungfrom
two cabinet hinges (not shown) screwed onto a
board. The board was nailed to roof poles of the
narrow entry trench extending behind the girl in the
photograph. The pulI-cord was attached to the pump
frame below its hinged top and extended along one
trench wall for the whole length of the shelter. Any
Fig. 6.2. Behind the girl is the homemade air
pump that made it possible for a family of six to live
ina crowded trenchshelterfor more than threedays.
Outside the temperature rose to 93°F.
one of the six occupants could pull this cord and
easily pump as much as 300 cubic feet per minute of
outdoor air through the shelter and through the
insect screens over both its entrances. (Without these
screens, the numerous mosquitoes in this irrigated
area would have made the family's shelter stay very
unpleasant.)
During the 77 hours that the family continu-
ously occupied theirnarrow, covered trench, the tem-
peratures outside rose as high as 93°F. Without the
air pump, the six occupants would have been driven
from their shelter by unbearable temperature-
humidity conditions during the day."
The photo in Fig. 6.2 also shows how the air
pump hung when not being operated, partialIy
blocking the entry trench and causing a "chimney
effect" flow of air at night. There was a 10-inch space
between the air pump and the trench floor, and the
resulting flow of air maintained adequate ventilation
in the cool of the desert night, when outdoor
temperatures dropped as low as 45°F. Cool outdoor
air flowed down into the entry and under the
motionless air pump, replacing the body-warmed air
inside the shelter. The entering cool air continuouslyforced the warm air out of the shelter room at ceiling
height through the emergency crawlway-exhaust
trench at the other end. When the weather is cool, a
piece of plastic or tightly woven cloth could be hung
in the doorway of a well designed, narrow shelter, to
cause a flow of fresh air in the same manner.
Numerous shelter occupancy tests have proved
that modern Americans can live for weeks in an
adequately cooled shelter with only 10square feet of
floor space per person." Other tests, such as one
conducted by the Navy near Washington, D.C.
during an abnormally cool two weeks in August,
1962, have shown that conditions can become
difficult even when summertime outdoor air is being
pumped through a long-occupied shelter at the rate
of 12 cubic feet per minute, per person.v':" This is
four times the minimum ventilation rate for each
occupant specified bythe FederalEmergencyMan-
agement Agency (FEMA) for American shelters: 3
cubic feet per minute (3 cfm). Three cfm isabout three.
times the supply of outdoor air needed to keep healthy
people from having headaches as a result of exhaled
carbon dioxide. In hot, humid weather, much more
outdoor air than 12cfm per person must be supplied to
acrowded, long-occupiedshelter, as willbedescribed in
the following section and in Appendix B.
MAINTAINING ENDURABLE SHELTER
CONDITIONS IN HOT WEATHER .
The Navy test mentioned above showed how
much modern Americans who are accustomed to air
conditioning could learn from jungle natives about
keepingcool and healthy byskillfullyusing hot, humid,
outdoorair. 