 shoring in Fig. 0.7. The
trench walls should be sloped and smoothed quite
accurately, so that the shoring can be tightened
againsttheearth. Iftheshoringdoesnotpresstightl~
against the trench walls,large wedges ofearth may be
jarred loose, hit the shoring, and cause it to collapse.
A different, comparativelysimple way to tighten
shoring is indicated by Fig. 0.8. This sketch shows a
4-pole frame designed to be installed every 2
1
/2 feet
along a trench in stable earth and to be tightened
against trench-wallshoringwith the same dimensions
as those shown in Fig. 0.7. Note that the two
horizontal brace poles have shallow "V" notches
ORNL-DWG 78-14430R
Fig. 0.7. An illustration of several ways to shore a trench inunstableearth, using variousmaterials. A
4-piece frame (consistingof4poles, or 4boards, installed asshownabove) should be installed every2
1
/2feetalong
the length ofthe trench, including the horizontal parts ofthe entryways. Allpartsofthe shoringshould beat least
2 inches below the roof poles, so that the downward forces on the roof will press only on the earth.WALL
POLE
I... -I
Fig. 0.9. Chinese "Man" Shelter tested at
20 psi, and undamaged because the thin poles yielded·
and were protected by earth arching. This drawing
was taken from a Chinese civil defense manual. The
dimensions are in centimeters.
I~
When blast-tested in loose, unstable soil, the
unsupported earth walls of the trench below the wall
poles were squeezed in. The 12-inch width ofthefoot
trench was reduced to as little as 4 inches by the short-
duration forces produced by 0.2-kiloton blast effects
at 50 psi. The much longer duration forces of a
megaton explosion would be far more damaging to
the shelter at lower overpressure ranges, due to
destabilizing and squeezing-in unshored earth at
depths many feet below ground level.
Calculations based on blast-test findings indi-
cate that the unsupported earth walls of a shelter are
likely to fail ifthe aboveground maximum overpress-
ure is greater than 5 to 7 psi and this overpressure is
caused by an explosion that is a megaton or more.
horizontal poles at the top of the triangle, one tied
inside and the other tied outside the triangle, to hold
the wall poles together. Before covering this shelter
with earth, a-o-inch-thickcoveringof small limbs was
placed horizontally across the approximately3-inch-
wide spaces between the 61/2-foot wall poles; the limbs
were then covered with bedsheets.
ORNL DWG 78·17246R
BOTTOM OF
SHALLOW V
SAWED AT SAME
SLOPE AS WALL POLE
Fig. 0.8. A 4-pole frame designed so that it can
be tightened against the shoring materials that must .
press firmly against the walls ofa trenchduginstable
earth. (In this sketch, the middle sections of three
poles have been removed, sothat the upper brace pole
may be seen more clearly.)
sawed in both ends. If these brace poles are driven
downward when positioned as shown, the two wall
poles are forced outward against the shoring
materials placed between them and the earth walls.
An upper brace pole should be cut to the length
needed to make it approximately the same height as
the roof poles on each side of it (no higher) after the
shoring is tightened. Finally, each "V"-notched end
should be nailed to its wall pole.
Light, yielding poles can serve simultaneously
both to roofand to shorea shelter. A good example is
the Chinese "Man" Shelter illustrated in Fig. 0.9,
requiring comparatively few poles to build.21This
shelter is too cramped for long occupancy, and its
unshored, lower earth walls can be squeezed in by
blast pressure. Therefore, it is not recommended if
sufficient materials are available for building a well-
shored, covered-trench shelter. It is described here
primarily to help the reader understand the construc-
tion of similarly designed entryways, outlined later in
this appendix. The room and the horizontal entryway
of the model tested were made of 61/2-foot poles
averaging only 3 inches in diameter. 