Parade, the Sundaytabloidread
by millions. The most influential article was
featured intheDecember23, 1983issueofScience
(theweekly magazineofthe AmericanAssocia-
tion for the Advancement ofScience): "Nuclear
winter, globalconsequencesofmultiplenuclear
explosions," byfive scientists, R. P. Turco, O. B.
Toon, T. P. Ackerman, J. B. Pollack, and C.
Sagan. Significantly,these activistsIrstedtheir
names to spell TTAPS, pronounced "taps," the
buglecall proclaiming"lightsout" ortheendof
a military funeral.
Until 1985, non-propagandizing scientists
did not begin to effectively refute the numerous
errors, unrealistic assumptions, and computer
modelingweaknessesofthe TTAPS and related
"nuclearwinter"hypotheses. A principalreason
is that government organizations, private cor-
porations, and most scientists generally avoid
getting involved in political controversies, or
making statements likely to enable antinuclear
activists to accuse them of minimizingnuclear
wardangers,thusundermininghopesfor peace.
Stephen Schneider has been called a fascist by
some disarmament supporters for having writ-
ten "NuclearWinterReappraised," accordingto
the Rocky Mountain News ofJuly6,1986. Three
dayslater,thispaper,thatuntilrecentlyfeatured
accounts of unsurvivable "nuclear winter,"
criticized Carl Sagan and defended Thompson
and Schneider in its lead editorial, "In Study of
NuclearWinter, LetScientists BeScientists." In
a free country, truth will out - although some-
times too late to effectively counter fast-hitting
propaganda,
Effective refutationof"nuclearwinter" also
was delayed bythe prestige ofpoliticians andof
politically motivated scientists and scientific
organizations endorsing the TTAPS forecast of
worldwide doom. Furthermore, the weaknesses
intheTTAPShypothesiscouldnotbeeffectively
explored until adequate Government funding
was made available to cover costs of lengthy,
expensive studies, including improved com-
puter modeling of interrelated, poorly under-
stood meteorological phenomena.
Serious clirnatic effects from a Soviet-U.S.
nuclear war cannot be completely ruled out.
However, possible deaths from uncertain cli-
matic effects are a small danger compared to
the uncalculable millions in many countries
likely to die from starvation caused by disas-
trous shortages of essentials of modern agri-
culture sure to result from a Soviet-American
nuclear war, and by the cessation of most
international food shipments.Chapter 2
Psychological Preparations
LEARNING WHAT TO EXPECT
The more one knows about the strange and
fearful dangers from nuclear weapons and about the
strengths and weaknesses of human beings when
confronted with the dangers of war, the betterchance
one has of surviving. Terror, a self-destructive
emotion, is almost always the result of unexpected
danger. Some people would think the end of the
world was upon them if they happened to be in an
area downwind from surface bursts of nuclear
weapons that sucked millions of tons of pulverized
earth into the air. They might give up all hope ifthey
did not understand what they saw. People are more
likely to endure and survive if they learn in advance
that such huge dust clouds, particularly ifcombined
with smoke from great fires, may turn day into
night-as have some volcanic eruptions and the
largest forest fires.
People also should expect thunder to crash in
strange clouds, and the earth to shake. The sky may
be lit with the flickering purples and greens of
"artificial auroras" caused by nuclear explosions,
especially those that are miles above the earth.
FEAR
Fear often is a life-saving emotion. When we
believe death is close at hand, fear can increase our
ability to work harder and longer. Driven byfear, we
can accomplish feats that would be impossible
otherwise. Trembling hands, weak legs, and cold
sweat do not mean that a person has become
ineffective. Doing hard, necessary work isone of the
best ways to keep one's fears under control.
Brave men and women who are self-confident
admit their fears, even when the threat of death is
remote. Then they plan and work to lessen the causes
of their fears. (When the author helped Charles A.
