
exploded could result in tens of thousands of
unpreparedAmericans sufferingthyroidinjury.
Unprepared Americans do not have potassium
iodide, the very effective prophylactic medica-
tion to prevent thyroid injury from radioiodine,
andfew could getitduringthe severaldaysthat
it would take trans-Pacific war fallout to reach
the United States. Fortunately, removal of even
a cancerous thyroid rarely is fatal to people
blessed with modern medical facilities.
Only about 7,500 Americans (people living
within a few miles of a nuclear power plant in
Tennessee) have been given prophylactic po-
tassium iodide to keep in their homes. No
government organization has advised even
Americans living near other nuclear facilities
to buy and keep any kind of prophylactic medi-
cine to protect their thyroids in case of a peace-
time nuclear accident. As expected, official
warnings and advice to the public continue not
even to mention preparations that individual
Americans could make to protect themselves
and their families against thyroid injury either
from trans-Pacific war fallout deposited on an
America at peace, or as a result of war fallout if
our country is subjected to a nuclear attack.
TheworstdangertoAmericansfrom trans-
Pacific fallout from a large nuclear war would
be the whole-body gamma radiation doses that
millions would receive from fallout particles
deposited on the ground, on streets, on and in
buildings. Protective countermeasures would
include both sheltering some pregnant women
and small children living in "hot spot" areas of
abnormally high rain-out of fallout, and evacu-
ating others. Unless such unavoidably time-
consuming and expensive countermeasures
weretaken, severalthousand additionalAmeri-
cans might die from cancer in the following 20
or 30 years. The largest total doses would be
received by people who would live normal
unsheltered lives for the first month or so after
fallout deposition, whilethe doserates wouldbe
highest.
Several thousand additional cancer deaths
would be extremely difficult to detect, if caused
by whole-body gamma radiation from fallout
deposited nationwide, with these scattered
deaths occurring over the 20 or 30 years follow-
ing a trans-Pacific war fallout disaster. For
during these same decades about 15 million
Americans normally would die from cancers
indistinguishable from those caused by whole-
body radiation from warfallout depositedon an
America at peace.
An authoritative risk estimate of getting
cancer from low doses of radiation is given in
Report No. 77 (March 15, 1984) of the National
Council on Radiation Protection and Measure-
ment, "Exposures from the Uranium Serieswith Emphasis on Radon and Its Daughters":
"The low dose model for total excess
cancer mortality is one hundred cases
per million people exposed to one rem
uniform whole body radiation. This
would maketheoverallriskofcancerto
the averageindividualinthepopulation
aboutone intenthousandperrem, i.e., if
ten thousand persons are exposed to a
dose of one rem (one thousand mrem),
one excess [fatal] cancer would be ex-
pected within the lifetime of the group."
Many radiation specialists have concluded
from studies of the effects of extremely low
doses that the above and similar conservative
estimates of excess cancerdeaths overestimate
the numberof fatalities likelytoresultfrom low
radiation doses, such as would be received by
millions of Americans from trans-Pacific war
fallout.
TO PROTECT YOURSELF AGAINST
TRANS-PACIFIC FALLOUT, START BY
REALIZING THAT:
• The dangers from trans-Pacific war fallout
have been increased by the continuing trend
toward deployment of more accurate, smaller,
more numerous nuclear weapons, because:
* A large nuclear explosion (half a mega-
ton, ormore) injects mostof itsfallout particles
and gases into the stratosphere, above the tops
of clouds and above the altitudes at which quite
prompt removal of contaminants from the at-
mosphere by scavenging takes place. Very
small particles in the stratosphere do not reach
thegroundbeforethey areblownatleastseveral
thousand miles. Most of these tiny particles
remain airborne for weeks to years, are very
widely dispersed, and are blown around the
world several to many times before being de-
posited. 