 experimenter with fires
and their associated dangers, reached this conclu-
sion: "If I were building a fallout shelter I would
spend a few extra dollars to build it in my backyard
rather than in my basement, locating the intake vent
as far as possible from any combustible material. In
such a shelter I would expect to survive anything
except the close-in blast effects.,,22
This advice also applies to expedient shelters
built during a crisis.Chapter 8
Water
WATER AND SALT REQUIREMENTS
Painful thirst has been experienced by very few
Americans. We take for granted that we will always
have enough water to drink. Most of us think of
"food and water" in that order, when we think of.
survival essentials that should be stored. But if
unprepared citizens were confined in a shelter by
heavy fallout, they soon would realize that they
should have given first priority to storing adequate
water.
For the kidneys to eliminate waste products
effectively, the average person needs to drink enough
water so that he urinates at least one pint each day.
(When water is not limited, most people drink
enough to urinate 2 pints. Additional water is lost in
perspiration, exhaled breath, and excrement.) Under
cool conditions, a personcouldsurvive for weeks on 3
pints of water a day-if he eats but little food and if
that food islow in protein. Coolconditions, however,
would be the exception in crowded belowground
shelters occupied for many days. Under such
circumstances four or five quarts of drinking water
per day are essential in very hot weather, with none
allowed for washing. For a two-week shelter stay, 15
gallons per person should be stored in or close to a
shelter. This amount usually would provide for some
water remaining after two weeks, to prevent thirst in
case fallout dangers were to continue.
In a 1962Navy shelteroccupancy test lastingtwo
weeks, 99 sailors each consumed an average of 2.4
quarts (2.3 liters) of water per day." The test was
conducted in August near Washington, D.C.; the
weather was unseasonably cool. The shelter was not
air-conditioned except during the last two days of the
test.
When one is sweating heavily and not eating
salty food, salt deficiency symptoms-s-especially
cramping-are likely to develop within a few days.
To prevent this, 6 or 8grams of salt (about 1/4oz, or 1/2
tablespoon) should be consumed daily in food and
drink. Iflittle or no food iseaten, this small dailysalt
ration should be added to drinking water. Under hot
conditions, a little salt makes water taste better.
CARRYING WATER
Most families have only a few large containers
that could be used for carrying water to a shelter and
storing it in adequate amounts for several weeks.
Polyethylene trash bags make practical expedient
water containers when used as waterproof liners
inside smaller fabric bags or pillowcases. (Plastic
bags labeled as being treated with insecticides or
odor-controlling chemicals should not be used.)
Figure 8.1 shows a teenage boy carrying over 10
gallons (more than 80 pounds) of water, well
balanced front and back for efficient packing. Each
of his two burlap bags is lined with two 20-gallon
polyethylene trash bags, one inside the other. (To
avoid possible pinhole leakage it is best to put one
waterproof bag inside another.)
To close a plastic bag of waterso that hardlyany
will leak out, first spread the top of the bag until the
two inner sides of the openingaretogether. Then fold
in the center so that the folded opening is 4
thicknesses, and smooth (see Fig. 8.2). Continue
smoothly folding in the middle until the whole
folded-up opening is .only about Ilh inches wide.
Then fold the top of the bag over on itself so the
folded-up opening points down. With a strip of cloth
or a soft cord, bind and tie the folded-over partwith a
bow knot, as illustrated.Fig. 8.1. Carrying 80 pounds of water in two
burlap bags, each lined with two larger plastic trash
bags, one inside the other..
QRNl.owG 78-7106
Fig. 8.2. Folding and tying the mouth of a
water-filled plastic bag.
