~
MAKING THE PISTON, THE PISTON ROD, AND ITS
HANDLE
1. Have a sheetmetal shop cut three 3-ft-long, 3-in.-wide strips of
galvanized steel sheetmetal that is no more than O.016-in.thick and
nolessthan 0.012-in.thick. (Mostgalvanized steel valley flashing used
by roofers and sold by many lumber yards is less than 0.016-in.thick;
30-gauge galvanized sheet metal sold by some sheetmetal shops is
about 0,015-in.thick.) Steel sheetmetal thicker than about0.016in. is
not springy enough and is unsatisfactory.
2. With a toleranceof+or-1/32-in.,cut from these strip's two strips
each 11-13/16-in.long,and two stripseach 11-3/4-in.long.(These four
strips first must be bent and then tacked to the four sides of the
plywood piston; these piston-sealing strips serve rather like piston
rings, by makingclose, sliding, low-friction contact with the sides of
the plywood "cylinder". Steel strips resist wear and if properly
lubricated make the pump serviceable for monthsofcontinuous use.)
3. Preparing the four sheetmetal sealing strips:
a. Since the strips to be tacked to the top and the bottom of the
piston must be bentdifferently from the strips to be tacked to its two
sides, mark"Tor B"oneach of.he two stripsthatare 11-13/16 in.long,
and mark "S" on each of the two strips that are 11-3/4 in. long.
b. On each of the two strips marked "T or B", draw an ink line
along which to make the approximately 30degree bend, and another
line for the approximately90degree bend. (See the left halfof Fig. 13
for the distances from the edges of these two "T or B"strips to their
bends.) Alsodraw two ink lines along which to drive tacks, spaced as
shown in the left half of Fig. 13.
Likewise draw four lines on each ofthe two strips marked "S",
as specified in the right half of Fig. 13,noting thatsome ofthese lines
are spaced differently than corresponding lines on the strips marked
"Tor B".
c. Usingasmallsharpened nail for a punch and placingonestrip
of sheetmetal at a time on a s..iooth board, punch 2 rows oftack holes
in each strip. The tack holes should he about 1-1/2 in. apart.
d. From a nominal 1 x 2-in. straight board, make two boards
each about 3/4 x 7/8 x 12-1/4in., for use in bendingthe sealing strips.
e. Securely sandwich a "T or B" strip of sheetmetal between the
two 12-1/4-in.-long boards placed exactly on top of each other, by
tightening two "C" clamps on the ends of the two boards, so that the
bending line 3/8-in. from one side ofthe strip isjust visible along the
straightedgeofa board.Then hold the two clampedboardsin a viseso
that the 3/8-in.-wide part of the sheetmetal strip is uppermost and
vertical.
f. Bend the exposed part of the strip about 30 degrees off the
vertical, away from the side of the strip where the holes have been
indented bythe punch. Tobend evenly, hammergentlyand repeatedly
ona 3/4 x3/4 x 18-in.board held againstthe exposed 3/8-in,-widepart
of the strip.
13. Permanentlyattach the fixed partofthe frontend X(see Fig. 7,
10and 12)with adhesiveand small nails tothe sides and tothe bottom.
Besure that its flap valve is upside down and is facing away from
the centerofthe pump, and that a long edge ofthis part is level with
the outer side of the bottom. Remove the construction forms.
14. Paint the interiorofthe "cylinder" with sealer-after removing
all adhesive that may be in its corners.
15.After the sealer dries, sandpaper the interior of the "cylinder"
with fine sandpaper, and paint it again with the final coat of sealer.
16.