 good expedient blast shelters,
there is enough time between the instant the light of
the explosion is seen and the arrival ofits blast wave
for an alert person to shut and securely fasten a well-
designed blast door. The smaller the explosion and
the greater the overpressure range, the shorter the
warning time. Thus at the IS-psi overpressure range
from a I-megaton surface burst (1.5 miles), the blast
wave arrives about 2.8 seconds after the light;
whereas at the 10-psi overpressure range from a 1-
megaton surface burst (1.9 miles), the blast wave
arrives about 4.5 seconds after the light. For a 20-
megaton surface burst, the warning time at the IS-psi
range is about 8 seconds, and at the 30-psi over-
pressure range, about 4 seconds. Experiments have
shown that even people who react quite slowly can
close and secure this door within 4 seconds after
seeing a spotlight shine on the door without warning.2. Build a vertical air shaft next to the outermost
side of each vertical entry, with an Overlapping-Flaps
Blast Valve (see Fig. 0.18) connecting each entry to its
air shaft, as shown in Fig. 0.19. These air shafts and
blast valves permit forced ventilation to be maintained
when the two blast doors are closed. Figure 0.18 illus-
trates the construction of a fast-closing expedient blast
valve, a design that wasundamaged bythe 65-psishock
wave and other effects produced by the explosion of a
million pounds of TNT. When blast-tested in a shock-
tube at 100-psi,the flaps were undamaged; they closed
in 6/ 1000of a second (0.006 sec.). This isas fast as the
best factory-made blast valves close.
QRNL DWG 73-2229A
DIRECTION OF
ENTERING
BLAST :
n
O.~·;
Fig. 0.18. Overlapping-Flaps Blast Valve,
made of boards, plywood, and strips cut from the
treads of worn car tires.
To withstand 50 psi, the load-bearing "2-inch"
boards (actually 11/2 inches thick) of the valve should
be at least 6 inches wide, if the I-in.-high air openings
are each made 12 in. wide, measured between two
vertical poles of a shelter entry. See Fig. 0.19, that
gives the dimensions of a valve that has been blast
tested.' Note that there are 5 inches of solid wood at
each end of each I-in.-high air opening. Ifthere are 5
such air openings to a valve, a properly installed KAP
(Appendix B) can pump air'at about 125cubic feet
ORNL-OWG 78-14429R
TOP OF BLAST
VALVESHOULD
BE AT LEAST
3 ft 8ElOWTHE
BLAST DOOR
ONENTRY
BRACE.->ARDS
PRESSING AGAINST
THE FACE OF THE
VALVE HOUSING
TO KEEP NEGATIVE
PRESSURE
FROM "SUCKING"
OUT THE WHOLE
VALVE
VERTICAL AIRDUCT
SHOULD EXTEND 2
/: OR 3ltBELOW
,/ BOTTOMOF BLAST
VALVE ANDPREFERABLY
-.;.~.. BELOWTHE BOTTOM OF
==~~- THEVERTICAL ENTRY
Fig:D.19. Installation ofa 50-psi Overlapping-
Flaps Blast Valve in such a way that it will not be
blown into a shelter by the blast overpressure, nor
pulled out by the following negative pressure
("suction'') phase.
per minute (125 cfrn) through a shelter equipped with
such valves. This ventilation rate isamplefor at least 40
people in cold weather. Except in hot and humid
weather, a constant air supply of about 10 cfrn per
shelter occupant is enough to maintain tolerable
conditions during continuous shelter occupancy for
many days.
If a factory-made blower capable of pumping
more than 100 cfrn is available, use it. Such a hand-
operated' blower can pump against mucn':mgnerau
flow resistances than a KAP can. 