Figure 8.3 shows how to roofand cover a water
storage pit so as to pr.otect the water. The "buried
roof" of waterproof material prevents any contami-
nation of the stored water by downward-percolating
rainwater, which could contain bacteria or small
amounts of radioactive substances from fallout. The
thick earth cover over the flexible roofing gives'
excellent blast protection, due to the earth arching
that develops under blast pressure. In a large Defense
Nuclear Agencyblasttest,a filled water-storage pit of
the size illustrated was undamaged by blast effects at
an overpressure range which could demolish the
strongest aboveground buildings (53 psi).
A simpler way to store waterisillustrated in Fig.
8.4. If the soil is so unstable that an unshored water
storage pit with vertical sides cannot be dug, the
opening of the bag (or of one bag placed inside
another) can simply be tied shut so as to minimize
leakage (see Fig. 8.4). Fill the bag with water, tie it,
and place it in the pit. Then bury it with earth to the
level of the water inside. A disadvantage of this
method is leakage through the tied-shut openingsdue
to pressure of loose earth on the bag. To lessen
leakage, leave an air space between the filled bag and
a roofing of board or sticks, so' that the weight of
earth piled on top of the roofing will not squeeze the
bag. This storage method has another disadvantage:
after the earthcoveringand the roofare removed, it is
difficult to bailout the water for use-because as
water is bailed out, the loose surrounding earth
moves inward and squeezes the bag above the
lowered water level.
Large volumes of water can be stored in plastic-
lined rectangular pits. In order to roof them with
widely available materials such as ordinary 3/4-inch
plywood or small poles, the pits should be dug no
wider than 3 feet. Figure 8.5 pictures such a pit: 8feet
Fig. 8.4. Thesetwo 30-gallonpolyethylenetrash
bags, one inside the other, held 16 gallons of water.
They were undamaged by 50-psi blast effects while
buried in dry, very light soil. The plywood roof and
the earth placed over the water bag were removed
before this picture was taken.
Fig. 8.5. Post-blast view of plastic-lined water-
storage pit undamaged at a 6.7-psi overpressure
range. This pit held about 200 gallons.
long, 27 inches wide, and 30 inches deep. It was lined
with a lO-foot-wide sheet of 4-mil polyethylene. The
edges of this plastic sheet were held in place by
placing them in shallow trenchesdug near the sides of
the pit and covering them with earth. Earth wasmounded over the plywood roof to a depth of about
30 inches, with a "buried roof" of polyethylene. The
earth cover and its "buried roof" were similar to the
pit covering illustrated by Fig. 8.3. This rectangular
pit contained about 200 gallons of water. No water
leaked out after the pit had been subjected to blast
effects severe enough to have flattened most
substantial buildings. However, rectangular pits at
higher overpressures failed, due to sidewall caving
that caused leaks.
In a subsequent blast test by Boeing Aerospace
Company, a plastic-lined water pit was undamaged at
the 200-psi overpressure range. First a rectangular
pit 4 ft. wide, 12 ft. long, and 2 ft. deep was dug.
Then inside this pit a 2 x 10 x 2-ft. water-storage
pit was dug, and lined with plastic film. After
being filled full of water, the storage pit was
coveredwith plywood, on whichwas shoveled2
ft. of earth.
Plastic garbage cans are usually watertight;
most used metal garbage cans are not. If thoroughly
cleaned and disinfected with a strong chlorine bleach
solution, watertight garbage cans can serve for
emergency water storage, as can some wastebaskets.
If new plastic film is available, it can be used as a
lining to waterproof any strong box. To lessen the
chances of the plastic being punctured, rough
containers first should be lined with fabric.
If shelter is to be taken in or near a building,
water trapped in hot water heaters and toilet flush
tanks or stored in tubs might be available after an
attack.
