 waves and
greatly increase overpressures near it.) Broken
eardrums are not serious in normal times, but after a
nuclear attack this injury is likely to be far more
dangerous to persons in crowded shelters without'
effective medical treatment. Lung damage, that can
result from overpressures as low as 10 to 12 psi,
would also be more serious under post-attack
conditions.
A blast door must withstand blast waves and
overpressure. Not only must the door itself be
sufficiently strong to withstand forces at least as great
as those which the shelterwillsurvive, but inaddition
the door frame and the entranceway walls must be
equally as strong. The expedient blast door pictured
in Fig. 0.13 was made of rough boards, each a full 2
inches thick. It had a continuous row of hinges made
of l8-inch-long strips cut from the treads of worncar
tires.
The strips were nailed to the vertical poles on
one side of the vertical entry. These and other details
of construction are shown in Fig. 0.14. Although the
two center boards were badly cracked by the shock
wave and overpressure at the l7-psi range, the doorFig. D.13. Blast door surrounded by 4 blast-
protector logs'that were notched and nailed together.
The wet, mounded soil had been compacted by the
blast but not blown away.
pictured in Fig. D.13 afforded good protection
against all blast effects from a surface explosion of a
million pounds of TNT. In Fig. D.14, note the
essential, strong tie-down attachment of the wires at
the bottom of the vertical entry, to prevent the blast
door from being yanked open by the negative
pressure ("suction'') that follows the overpressure:
Blast doors must be protected against reflected
pressures from blast waves that could strike an edge
of an unprotected door and tearit off its hinges. Note
the blast-protector logs installed around the door
pictured in Fig. D.14. When the door was closed, the
tops of these four logs were about 2 inches higher
than the door, thus protecting its edges on all sides.
The closed door must be prevented from
rebounding like a spring and opening a fraction of a
second after being bowed down by overpressure, or
from being opened and perhaps torn off its hinges by
the partial vacuum ("suction") that follows the
overpressure phase. Figure D.14 gives the details of
such a hold-down system for a blast door. Note that
near the bottom of the vertical entry the 6 strong
wires must encircle a horizontal pole that isflattened
on one side and nailed to the vertical wall poles with
at least a dozen 6-inch (60-penny) nails. Blast tests up
to the 53-psi overpressure range have proved that this
hold-down system works.'
Figure D.l5 shows a blast door made of 5
thicknesses of 3/4-inch exterior plywood, well glued
and nailed together with 41/2-in. nails at 4-in.
spacings. This door was protected by 4 blast-
protector logs, each 8 feet long and about 8 inches in
diameter. The logs were notched, nailed together,
and surrounded with earth. For protection against
ignition by' the thermal pulse from an explosion,
exposed wood and rubber should be coated with
thick whitewash (slaked lime) or mud, or covered
with aluminum foil.
An equally strong blast door and the door base
upon which itcloses canbe made of poles. Ifpoles are
fresh-cut, they are easy to work with ax and saw.
Figure D.16 shows the best blast-tested design. This
door also had a continuous row of hinges made from
worn auto tire treads. The pole to which the hinges
were attached was 7 inches in diameter after peeling
and had been flattened on its top and outersides. The
two other poles of the equal-sided triangle were 8
inches in diameter and had been flattened with an ax
on the bottom, top,and inner sides. The three poles
were each 55 inches long. They were notched and
spiked together with 60-penny nails so that the door
would close snugly on its similarly constructed base
made of three stout poles. Other poles, at least 7
inches in diameter before being hewn so that they
would fit together snugly, were nailed side-by-sideon
top of the three outer poles.
