 Cover the pebbles with one thickness of
terrycloth towel, burlap sackcloth, or other quite
porous cloth. Cut the cloth in a roughly circular
shape about 3 inches larger than the diameter of the
can.
4. Take soil containing some clay-almost any
soil will do-from at least 4 inches below the surface
of the ground. (Nearly all fallout particles remain
near the surface except after deposition on sand or
gravel.)
• Settling
Settling is one of the easiest methods to remove
most fallout particlesfrom water. Furthermore, ifthe
water to be used is muddy or murky, settling itbefore
filtering will extend the life of the filter. The
procedure is as follows:
I, Fill a bucket or other deep container three-
quarters full of the contaminated water.
2. Dig pulverized clay or clayey soil from a
depth of four or more inches below ground surface,
and stir it into the water. Use about a l-inch depth of
Ifthe 6 or 7 inches offiltering soil isa sandy clay
loam, the filter initially will deliver about 6 quarts of
clear water per hour. (If the filtration rate is faster
than about 1quart in 10 minutes, remove the upper
fabric and recompress the soil.) After several hours,
the rate will bereduced to about 2 quarts per hour.
When the filtering rate becomes too slow, it can
be increased by removing and rinsing the surface
fabric, removing about 1/2 inch of soil, and then
replacing the fabric. The lifeofa filter isextended and
its efficiency increased if muddy waterisfirst allowed
to settle for several hours in a separate container, as
described below. After about 50 quarts have been
filtered, rebuild the filter by replacing the used soil
with fresh soil.
5. Pulverize the soil, thengently press itin layers
over the cloth that covers the pebbles, so that the
cloth is held snugly against the sides of the can. Do
not use pure clay (not porous enough) or sand (too
porous). The soil in the can should be 6 to 7 inches
thick.
6. Completely cover the surface of the soil layer
with one thickness of fabric as porous as a bath towel.
This is to keep the soil from being eroded as water is
poured into the filtering can. The cloth also will
remove some of the particlesfrom the water. Adozen
small stones placed on the cloth near its edges will
secure it adequately.
7. Support the filter can on rods or sticks placed
across the top of a container thatislarger indiameter
than the filter can. (A dishpan will do.)
The contaminated water should be poured into
the filter can, preferably after allowing it to settle as
described below. The filtered water should be
disinfected by one of the previously described
methods.
POROUS
CLOTH
ORNL DWG 77-18431
-_-__~_- - WATER
around the horne. This expedient filter can be built
easily by proceeding as follows:
1. Perforate the bottom of a 5-gallon can, a
large bucket, a watertight wastebasket, or a similar
container with about a dozen nail holes. Punch the
holes from the bottom upward, staying within about
2 inches of the center.
2. Place a layer about 1112inches thick of washed
pebbles or small stones on the bottom of the can. If
pebbles are not available, twisted coat-hanger wires
or small sticks can be used.
STICKS
OVER
PAN ~_-~ f.IL.:IER~D W~EI3 =-_~:dry clay or dry clayey soil for every 4-inch depth of
water. Stir until practically all the clay particles are
suspended in the water.
3. Let the clay settle for at least 6 hours. The
settling clay particles willcarry most of the suspended
fallout particles to the bottom and cover them.
4. Carefully dip out or siphon the clear water,
and disinfect it.
• Settling and Filtering
Although dissolved radioactive material usually
is only a minordanger in fallout-contaminated water,
it is safest to filter even the clear water produced by
settling, if an earth filter is ayailable. Finally-as
always-the water should be disinfected.
