" or "Extra Heavy Duty" aluminum foil isavailable. make 5-ply
leaves rather than S-ply leaves of standard foil: the resultant fallout meter will be almost as
accurate.)
3. Doorbell-wire. or other light insulated wire (preferably but not necessarily a single-strand wire
inside the insulation h inches.
4. Any type of clean, fine thread that has not been anti-static treated will serve to
suspend a KFM's leaves. (Almost all kinds of sewing thread and fly-tying thread
manufactured in 1987 are anti-static treated. are poor insulators. and are unsatis-
Iactory.) In 1987 the best widely available excellent insulating thread is unwaxed
dental floss: floss is not anti-static treated. Most unwaxed dental floss is too thick and
stiff for properly suspending KFM leaves. but. since dental floss is not a twisted
thread. Y9u can make flexible strand-threads from it. Make each no more than one-
quarter as thick as the floss. and about 12 inches long. First separate several strands
at the end of the floss outside its dispenser. Then separate strands while pulling one
wayan the end of the strand-thread that you want and the other way on the unwanted
strands. Use only a clean needle to touch and separate the strands in the middle 6
inches of the 12-inch-long piece of unwaxed dental floss.
A widely sold dental floss. Johnson and Johnson's Extra Fine Unwaxed. drawn outof
its dispenser without splitting it. makes quite satisfactory leaf-supporting threads.
However. better leaf-supporting threads can be made by first separating any dental
floss into thinner. more flexible threads.
Very thin monofilament fishing line or leader is an excellent insulator. The 2-pound-
test strength. such as Du Pont's "Stren" monofilament fishing line. is best. "Trilene"
2-pound "nylon leader." a monofilament manufactured by Berkley and Company.
also is excellent. (A 4-pound monofilament line will serve. but is disadvantageously
stiff.) Some modern monofilament lines or leaders such as "Trilene" contain an
additive that makes them pliant. but also makes them poorer insulators for the first
several hours after being taken out of their dispenser and used to suspend the leaves
of a KFM. However. in about6 hours the silica gel or anhydrite dryingagent in a KFM
removes this additive and the monofilament becomes as good an insulator as even
strands of unwaxed dental floss.
To minimize thechance of usinga piece of monofilamentorotherthread thathasbeen
soiled and thus changed into a poor insulator. always first remove and discard the
outermost layer of threadon any spool thathas notbeen kept clean in a plastic bagor
other packaging after being initially unwrapped.
During a worsening crisis or after an attack. neither thread that has not been anti-
static treated. nor unwaxed dental floss. nor clean 2-pound or 4-pound monofilament
line may be available. However. most American homes have an excellent insulator.
very thin polyethylene film - especially clean dry cleaners' bags. A narrow
insulatingstripcutonly 1/16inch wide can be usedto suspendeach KFM leaf. instead
of an insulatingthread. (Installedleaves suspended on strips of thin plasticfilm must
be handled with care.)
To cut 1/ 16-inch-widestrips from verythin polyethylenefilm. first cut a pieceabout6
x 10 inches. Tape only the two 6-inch-wide ends to a piece of paper (such as a brown
grocery bag). so that the film is held flat and smooth on the paper. Make 10 marks.
1/ 16-inchapart. oneach of the two tapes that are holdingthe film. Place a light so that
its reflection onthe film enables you to see the edge of the film thatyou are preparing
to cut. Then use a very sharp. clean knife or clean razor blade. guided by the edge of a
firmly held ruler. to cut 9 strips. of which you will select the best two. When cutting.
hold the knife almost horizontal, with the plane of its blade perpendicular to the
taped-down film. Throughout this procedure avoid touching the center parts of the
strips.
5. A piece of clear plastic film - a 6 x 6 inch square. Clear vinyl (4 mils thick) used for
storm-proofing windows is best. 