 1-min exposure results in a
difference in readings of2 mm, the table shows the dose rate
was 1.6 R/hr; then if the KFM is exposed for 4 minutes at
this same dose rate of 1.6 R/hr, the table shows that the
resultant difference in readings is 8 mm.
The longer exposure results in a more accurate
determination ofthe dose rate.
Ifthe dose rate isfound to be greater than 0.2 R/hr and time
is available, recharge the KFM and repeat the dose-rate
measurement --to avoid possible mistakes.
Another example: Assume that three days after an attack the occupants
of a dry, hot cave giving almost complete protection against fallout are in
desperate need ofwater. The dose rate outside is found to be 20 R/hr. To
backpack water from a source 3 miles away is estimated to take 2-112
hours. The cave occupants estimate that the water backpackers will
receive a dose in 2-112 hours ofSO R (2.5 hr x 20 R/hr = SO R). A dose of
SO R will cause only mild symptoms (nausea in about 10% of persons
receiving a SO R dose) for persons who previously have received only very
small doses. Therefore, one ofthe cave occupants makes a rapid radiation
surveyfor about 1-112 miles along the proposed route, stopping to charge
and read a KFM about every quarter of a mile. He finds no dose rates
much higher than 20 R/hr.
So, the cave occupants decide the risk is small enough to justify some of
them leaving shelterfor about 2-112 hours to get water.
Fortunately, the human body -- if given enough time -- can repair most of
the damage caused by radiation. An historic example: A healthy man
accidently received a daily dose of 9.3 R (or somewhat more) of
fallout-type radiation each day for a period of 106 days. His total
accumulated dose was at least 1000R. A dose of one thousand roentgens,
if received in a few days, is almost three times the dose likely to kill the
average man if he receives the whole dose in a few days and after a
nuclear attack cannot get medical treatment, adequate rest, etc.
However, the only symptomthis man noted was seriousfatigue.
The occupants ofa high-protection-factor shelter (such as a trench shelter
covered with 2 or 3 feet of earth and having crawlway entrances) would
receive less than 11200 ofthe radiation dose theywould receive outside.
Even in most areas of very heavy fal1out, persons who remain continously
in such a shelter would receive a total accumulated dose of less than 2S R
in the first day after the attack, and less than 100R in the first two weeks.
At the end of the first two weeks, such shelter occupants could start
working outside for an increasing length of time each day, receiving a
daily dose of no more than 6 R for up to two months without being
sickened.
C.. Calculating the Dose Received
The dose of fallout radiation -- that is, the amount of fallout radiation
received -- determines the harmful effects on men and animals. Being
exposed to a high dose rate is not always dangerous -- provided the
exposure is shortenough to result in only a small dose being received. For
example, if the dose rate outside an excellent fallout shelter is 1200 R/hr
and a shelter occupant goes outside for 30 seconds; he would be exposed
for 112of 1 minute, or 112 of 1160of an hour, which equals 11120 hour.
Therefore, since the dose he would receive ifhe stayed outside for 1 hour
would be 1200 R, in 30 seconds he would receive 11120 of 1200, which
equals 10R(1200Rdivided by 120 = 10 R). Atotal daily dose of 10 R (10
roentgens) will not cause any symptoms if it is not repeated day after day
for a week or more.
In contrast, if the average dose rate of an area were found to be 12 R/hr
and if a person remained exposed in that particular area for 24 hours, he
would receive a dose of 288 R(12 R/hr x 24 hr =288 R). Even assuming
that this person had beenexposed previously to very little radiation, there
would stilI be a serious risk that this 288 Rclosewould be fatal under the
difficult conditions thatwould fol1ow a heavy nuclear attack.
D. 