oushould be
careful not to take more than the recommended dose or
take it for longer than you are told. Side effects are
unlikely because of the low dose and the short time you
will be taking the drug.
Possible side effects include skin rashes, swelling of the
salivary glands, and "iodism" (metallic taste, burning
mouth and throat, sore teeth and gums, symptoms of a
head cold. and sometimes stomach upset and diarrhea).
A few people have an allergic reaction with more serious
symptoms. These could be fever and joint pain~, or
swelling of parts of the face and body and at times
severe shortness of breath requiring immediate medical
attention.
Takingiodide may rarely cause overactivity of the thyroid
gland, underactivity of the thyroid gland, or enlargement
of the thyroid gland (goiter).
WHAT TO DO IF SIDE EFFECTS OCCUR
If the side effects are severe or if you have an allergic
reaction, stop taking potassium iodide. Then, if possible,
call a doctor or public health authority for instructions.
HOW SUPPLIED
Tablets (Potassium Iodide Tablets, U.S.P.): bot-
tles of [number of tablets in a bottle] tablets
( ). Each white, round,
scoredtabletcontains 130 mg. potassiumiodide.
Note that this official FDA required 'insert
given above prudently stresses the name, the
pronunciation, andthechemicalformula (KI)of
these Government-approved 130-mgpotassium
iodide tablets. Perhaps this emphasized infor-
mation will keep some alarmed Americans
(misinformed in a future crisis by the media
that typically stated during the Chernobyl
nuclearaccidentthat"iodinetablets" were being'
giventopeopleendangeredbyradioactiveiodine
from the burning reactor) from getting and
taking iodine tablets, widely sold for water
purification, or tincture of iodine.
Strangely, neither in official information
available to the general public on the prophy-
lacticuse ofKI norinthe above-mentionedFDA
"FinalRecommendations" is any mentionmade
of the much greater need for KI in a nuclear
war-even for Americans during an overseas
nuclear war in which the United States would
not be a belligerent.
Also note that this official insert contains
no instructionsfor givinga crushed KI tabletto
infants and small children. Nor is there any
mention ofthe fact that the KI under the tablet's
coatingis a more painful-tastingdrugthanany
that most people ever have taken. This omitted
informationisgiveninthe nexttolastsectionof
this chapter.'
• Protection against radioactive iodine
in fallout from a nuclear war fought outside
the United States.
Most strategists believe that a nuclear war fought
by nations otherthan the United States isa more likely
catastrophe than a nuclear attack on America. Several
of the Soviet and Chinese nuclear test explosions have
resulted in very light fallout deposition and some
contamination of milk by radioactiveiodine in manyof
the 50 states. However, serious contamination of milk,
fruits, and vegetables could result if war fallout from
many overseas nuclear explosions were carried
toan Americaatpeace. Thesepotentialdangers
and effective countermeasures are included in
Chapter 18, Trans-Pacific Fallout.
If a nuclear war were to be fought in northern
parts of Asia, or in Europe, or in the Middle East, a
very small fraction of the fallout would come to earth
on parts or all ofthe United States.w This fallout would
not result in an overwhelming catastrophe to Ameri-
cans, although the long-term health hazards would be
serious by peacetime standardsand the economiclosses
would be great.w The dangers from radioactive iodine
in milk produced bycows thatate fallout-contaminated
feeds or drank fallout-contaminated water would be
minimized ifAmericansdid not consumedairy products
for several weeks after the arrival of war fallout. Safe
milk and other baby foods would be the only essential
foods that soon would be in very short supply. The
parents of babies and young children who had stored
potassium iodidewould beespeciallythankful they had
made this very inexpensive preparation, that can give
99%-effective protectionto the thyroid. All members of
families with a supply of potassium iodide could safely
eat a normal diet long before those without it could do
so.
The most dangerous type of radioactive iodine
decays rapidly. 