, for these reasons:
* Blast shelters should also protect against initial
nuclear radiation emitted by the fireball. This
radiation is reduced by half when it penetrates
about 5inches of packed earth (as compared to
a halving-thickness of only about 3Y2 inches of
earth against radiation from fallout).
* The initial radiation, in some areas where good
blast shelters will survive, can be much greater
than the fallout radiation is likely to be.
* Initial nuclear radiation that comes through
entryways ismore difficult to attenuate(reduce)
than fallout radiation. Therefore, longer entry-
ways or additional right-angle turns must be
provided.
For these reasons, good blast shelters should be
covered with at least 4ft ofwell-packed, average-weight
earth, or 5 ft of unpacked or light earth. (A 3-ft
thickness gives excellent protection against radiation
from fallout.)
A 50-PSI SMALL-POLE SHELTER
This expedient blast shelterisdescribed indetail to
enable the reader to build this model. The details will
help him better understand the design principles of
other expedient blast shelters that are capable of
preventing injuries from blast effects severe enough to
destroy all ordinary buildings and kill the occupants.
Blast tests and calculations have indicated that the
Small-Pole Shelter described and illustrated in Appen-
dix A.3 willafford protection againstall weaponeffects
at overpressureranges up to 50psithatare produced by
an explosion of 1 megaton, or larger, provided the
shelter is:
• Made with horizontal entryways each .with
ceilings no higher than 7 ft, 2 in., no wider than 3 ft,
and each at least 10 ft long-to lessen the radiation
coming through the 'entries (see Fig. 0.20). Lower
and narrower entryways would give betterprotection
but would increase the time required for entry.
• Constructed with a floor ofpoles thatare4in. or
more in diameter, laid side-by-side, with the wall
poles resting on the floor poles. The ground shock
and earth pressures at a depth of 10 ft or more
resulting from an overpressure on the surface of more
than about 35 psi, ifcaused by a largeexplosion, may
destabilize and squeeze earth upward into the shelter
through an unprotected earth floor. The Small-Pole
Shelterdescribed in Appendix A.3 has an earth floor.
• Installed in an excavation about 13 feet deep,
with the shelter's vertical entrances appropriately
increased in height so that the blast doors are only
about one foot above the original ground level.
To prevent possibly life-endangering cave-
inofthe 13-foot-deep trenchthatwas dugfor the
blast testing of this model shelter, the trench
walls were sloped about 45 degrees. The shelter
was built as a braced, free-standing structure,
and then covered. During a crisis it would be
impractical to safely excavate a deep trench
with steeplyslopingwalls and then safely build
a shelter in it. A 13-foot-deep trench is usually
too deep to dig by hand-c-especta.Ily since to dig
itwith safelyslopingwallsrequirestheremoval
of a large amount of earth.BLAST DOOR
43/4 in. THICK
PLYWOOD BLAST PROTECTOR
LOG
\
\
(.:J >-\Z a: , ~.
- ~.' ......
...J Z ',~
Ww '"uw
.0c-.- ~
N '
,~
~M
.... u.o
I,,,
I,,
I'
.-,'"
URNL-DWG 78-18835
9 in.
Fig. 0.20. Entryway of Small-Pole Blast Shelter shielded against initial nuclear radiation. This
sketch is a simplified vertical section through the centerline of one end of the shelter.
• Made with 4 rectangular horizontal braces in
each vertical entry, in addition to the ends of the two
long, ladder-like braces. The detailed drawings in
Appendix A show such braces. The lowest rectangu-
lar brace should be positioned 31/2 feet above the
flooring at the bottom of the vertical entry (see Fig.
0.20).
• Equipped with blast doors each made of5sheets
of 3 4-inch exterior plywood (see Fig. 0.15) bonded
with resin glue and nailed together with 41/2 in. nails.
The nails should be driven on 4-in. 