 Fig. 9.2.
For adjusting the burning pieces offuel on the
grate, make a pair of 12-inch-Iong tongs of coat-
hanger wire, as illustrated by Fig. 9.3.
To lessen heat losses through the sides and
bottom of the bucket, cover the bottom with about
I inch of dry sand or earth. Then line part of the inside
and bottom with two thicknesses of heavy-duty
aluminum foil, if available.
To make it easier to place the pot in the stove
or take it out without spilling itscontents, replace the
original bucket handle with a longer piece of strong
wire.
Operation:
The Bucket Stove owes its efficiency to: (I) the
adjustable air supply that flows up through the
burning fuel, (2) the movable grate that lets the
operator keep the maximum amount of flame in
contact with the bottom of the cooking pot, and
(3) the space between the sides of the pot and the
inside of the bucket that keeps the rising hot gases
in close contact with the sides of the pot.
In a shelter, a Bucket Stove should be placed
as near as practical to an air exhaust opening before
a fire is started in it.Fig. 9.2. Bucket-stove with adjustable damper and movable wire grate.Fig. 9.3. Bucket-stove with its sliding damper partly closed. Foot-long tongs of coat hanger wire
are especially useful when burning twisted half-pages of newspaper.If wood is to be burned, cut anti split dry wood
into small pieces approximately 1/2inch square and
6 inches long. Start the fire with paper and small
slivers of wood, placing some under the wire grate.
To keep fuel from getting damp in a humid shelter,
keep it in a large plastic bag.
If newspaper is to be burned, use half-pages
folded and twisted into. 5-inch-long "sticks," as
illustrated. Using the wire tongs, feed a paper"stick"
into the fire about every half-minute.
Add fuel and adjust the damper to keep the
flame high enough to reach the bottom of the pot,
but not so high as to go up the sides of the pot.
To use the Bucket Stove for heating in very
cold weather, remove the pot and any insulation
around the sides of the bucket; burn somewhat more
fuel per minute.
If used with the Fireless Cooker described on
the following pages, a Bucket Stove can be used
to thoroughly cook beans, grain, or tough meat
in water. Three quarts of such food can be cooked
with less fuel than is required to soft-boil an egg
over a small campfire.
• Fireless Cooker
A Fireless Cooker cooks by keeping a lidded
pot of boiling-hot food so well insulated all around
that it loses heat very slowly. Figure 9.4 shows one
of these simple fuel-saving devices made from a
bushel basket filled with insulating newspapers,
with a towel-lined cavity in the center. The cavity is
the size of the 6-quart pot. A towel in this cavity goes
all around the pot and willbe placed overit to restrict
air circulation. If the boiling-hot pot of food is then
covered with newspapers about 4 inches thick, the
temperature will remain for hours so near boiling
that in 4 or 5 hours even slow-cooking food will be
ready to eat.
The essential materials for making an effective
Fireless Cooker are enough of any good insulating
materials (blankets, coats, paper, hay that isdry and
pliable) to cover the boiling-hot pot all over with at
least 3 or 4 inches of insulation. A container to keep
the insulating materials in place around the pot is
useful.
Wheat, other grains, and small pieces of tough
meat can be thoroughly cooked by boiling them
briskly for only about 5 minutes, then insulating
the pot in a Fireless Cooker for 4 or 5 hours, or
Fig. 9.4. Boiling-hot pot of food being placed in
an expedient Fireless Cooker.
overnight. Whole beans should be boiled for 10 to
15 minutes before they are placed in a Fireless
Cooker.
COOKING GRAIN AND BEANS WHEN
SHORT OF FUEL OR POTS
• Cooking Grain Alone
When whole grains are pounded or ground by
expedient means, the result usually is a mixture of
coarse meal, fine meal, and a little flour. 