 7-psi overpressure range. (At 7 psi, most
buildings would be demolished.) Without blast
doors, occupants of the shelter could be injured,
although probably not fatally at this overpressure.
Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant
from fires producing carbon monoxide and toxic
smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In wooded areas with small trees, for builders
who have an ax or a bow saw, crosscut or chain saw,
and digging tools. Or in an~ location where the
necessary poles may be obtained.
In stable earth, where the water table or rock is
more than 41:2 ft below the surface.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
Fora typical family orothergroup withtwo
or more members able to work hard for most of
48 hours. (Stronger-than-average families with
almostallmembers ableto workhard havecom-
pletedthis type of shelter is about24 hours after
receiving step-by-step, well illustrated instruc-
tions. before travelling to the wooded building
site and beginning to cut trees and haul poles.)
CAPACITY
The shelter illustrated is the minimum length
recommended for 4 persons. For each additional
person, add at least 23/ 4 ft to the length of the shelter
room. If more than about 10 persons are to be
sheltered, build 2 or more separate shelters.
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
I. Before beginning work, study the drawings
and read ALL of the following instructions.
Divide the work so that some people will be
digging while others are cutting and hauling
poles. CHECK OFF EACH STEP WHEN
COMPLETED.
2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed: (I) a ventilating pump, and (2) the
storage of at least 15 gallons of drinking water
per occupant (see Appendix B and Chapter 8).
3. Start to assemble materials and tools. Those
listed are for the illustrated 4-person shelter with
a room II ft long.
A. Essential Materials and Tools
• Saw (bow saw or crosscut preferred)
and/or ax for cutting poles to the lengths and
diameters illustrated.
• Shovels (one for each two workers).
• Pick (if the ground is hard).
• Rainproof roof materials (very impor-
tant in rainy, cold weather). At least 2square
yards of such material per person would be
required; 3 square yards per person would be
better. Shower curtains, plastic tablecloths,
plastic mattress covers, canvas, and the like
can be used. Also needed are 2 pieces of
plastic or tightly woven cloth, each about
61/ 2 X 61h ft, to make canopies over the two
shelter openings.
• Materials and tools for buildinga simple
shelter-ventilating pump, a KAP 22 in. wide
and 36 in. long. (See Appendix 8.) Only in
cold or continuously breezy, cool weathercan tolerable temperatures and humidities be
maintained for days in a crowded under-
ground shelter that lacks an air pump.
• Containers for storing adequate water.
(See Chapter 8.)
B. Useful Materialsand Tools
• Large cans, buckets, and/or pots with
bail handles-in which to carry earth and
later to store drinking water and human
wastes.
• Two bedsheets and two pillowcases per
person for covering cracks between roofing
logs, making "sandbags," and improvising
bedsheet-hammocks and bedsheet-chairs.
• A file.
• A measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler.
• Rope, or strong wire (100 ft)-to make
earth-retaining pole walls close to the shelter
openings (as explained in step 19) and for
hammock supports, etc.
• Chain saw, pick-mattock, hammer,
hatchet, pliers.
• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil-to keep
hand saws from sticking in gummy wood.
• Expedient life-support items recorn-
mended in this book.
• Mosquito netting or window screen to
cover the openings, if mosquitoes or fliesare
likely to be a problem.
4. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP.
5. Wear gloves from the start-even tough hands
can blister after hours of chopping and digging,
and become painful and infected.
6. Ifpossible, select a location for the shelter that is
in the open and at least 50 ft from a building or
woods. 