 1990 is selling 130-mg KI tablets
without prescription at the lowest price is Pre-
paredness Products, 3855 South 500 West, Bldg.
G, Salt Lake City, Utah 84115. This company
sells 14 tablets, in a brown, screw-cap glass
bottle, for $3.50, postpaid, including shipping
charges. For three or more bottles, the price is
$2.50 per bottle.
AfterthedisastrousRussian nuclearpower
reactor accident at Chernobyl in May of 1986,
pharmacies in Swedensoon sold all oftheir 130-
mg potassium iodide tablets and Poland limited
its inadequate supplies of prophylactic iodide
salts to the protection of children. In California,
pharmacists reported abnormallylarge sales of
iodine tablets, and also of tincture of iodine-
apparently due to the buyers' having been mis-
informedbythe media'sreports thatEuropeans
were taking "iodine" for protection.
Individualscanbuychemicalreagentgrade
potassium iodide, that is purer than the phar-
maceutical grade, from some chemical supply
firms. No prescription or other authorization is
necessary. In 1990 the least expensive source of
which I am aware is NASCa, 901 Jamesville
Avenue, Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin 53538. The
pricefor 100 grams (100,000mg) in 1990 is$10.50,
plus $2.00 to $4.00 for shipping costs. Thus the
costin 1990 for a 130-mgdailydose is less than2
cents. NASCa sells 500 grams (500,000 mg-
about one pound) for $35.50, plus $2.00 to $4.00
for shipping-making the cost per standard
daily dose only one cent.
For years of storage, crystalline or granular potas-
sium iodide is better than a saturated solution. Dry
potassium iodide should bestored in a dark bottle with
a gasketed, non-metallic cap that screws on tightly.
Two-fluid-ounce bottles, filled with dry potassium
iodide as described below, are good sizes for a family.
Separate medicine droppers should be kept with stored
bottles.
Thus at low cost you can buy and store
enough potassium iodide for your family and
large numbers of your friends and neighbors-
as I did years ago.
• Practical expedient ways to prepare and
take daily prophylactic doses of a saturated
solution of potassium iodide.
To prepare a saturated solution of potassium
iodide, fill a bottle about -60% full of crystalline or
granular potassium iodide. (A 2-fluid-ounce bottle,
made of dark glass and having a solid, non-metallic,screwcap top, is a good size for a family. About 2
ounces of crystalline or granular potassium iodide is
needed to fill a 2-fluid-ounce bottle about 60% full.)
Next, pour safe, room-temperature water into the
bottle until it is about 90% full. Then close the bottle
tightly and shake it vigorously for at least 2 minutes.
Some of the solid potassium iodide should remain
permanently undissolved at the bottom of the bottle;
this is proof that the solution is saturated.
Experiments with a variety of ordinary household
medicine droppersdetermined that Idrop ofa saturated
solution of potassium iodidecontainsfrom 28to 36 mg
of potassium iodide. The recommended expedient
daily doses of a saturated solution (approximately 130
mg for adults and children older than one year, and 65
mg for babies younger than one year) are as follows:
* For adults and children older than one year, 4
drops of a saturated solution of potassium iodide each
24 hours.
* For babies younger than one year, 2 drops of a
saturated solution of potassium iodide each 24 hours.
Potassium iodide has a painfully bad taste, so
badthata singlecrystalor 1dropofthe saturated
solution in a small child's mouth would make
him cry. (A small child would be screaming in
pain before he could eat enough granular or
crystalline KI to make him sick. Some KI
tablets are coated and tasteless.