a))y
exposed to radioactive Ia\)out produced by a large
H-bomb test explosion on Bikini Atoll. about
100 miles away. Twenty-two of them developed
thyroid abnormalities beginning nine years later." In
the two days before they were taken out ofthe fallout
area. these completely uninformed natives. living
essentially outdoors. had received estimated whole-
body gamma-ray doses of about 175 R from the
fallout all around them. They absorbed most of the
radioactive iodine retained by their thyroid glands as
a result of eating and drinking fallout-contaminated
food and water during their two days of exposure.
(Because of unusual environmental conditions at the
time of fallout deposition. some of the retained
radioactive iodine may have come from the air
they breathed.)
Anextremely small and inexpensive daily dose
of the preferred non-radioactive potassium salt.
potassium iodide (KI). iftaken I : hour to Iday before
exposure to radioactive iodine. will reduce later
absorption of .radioactive iodine by the thyroid to
only about I% of what the absorption would be
without this preventive measure. Extensive experi-
mentation and study have led to the Federal Drug
Administration's approval of l30-milligram (130-
mg) tablets for this preventive (prophylactic) use
only.":" A 130-mg dose provides the same daily
amount of iodine as does each tablet that English
authorities for years have placed in the hands of the
police near nuclear power plants. for distribution to
the surr oUlll1ing popUlation in the very unlikt:ly event
of a major nuclear accident. It is quite likely that a
similar-sized dose is in the Russian "individual.
standard first-aid packet." According to a compre-
hensive Soviet 1969 civil defense handbook," this
first-aid packet contains "anti-radiation tablets
and anti-vomiting tablets (potassium iodide and
etaperain)...
• Prophylactic use of potassium iodide
in peacetime nuclear accidents.
When the Three Mile Island nuclear reactor
accidentwasworseninganditappearedthatthe
reactor's containment structure might rupture
and release dangerous amounts of radioactive
iodines and other radioactive material into the
atmosphere, the Government rushed prepara-
tion of small bottles of a saturated solution of
potassium iodide. The reactor's containment
structure did not rupture. The 237,013 bottles of
saturated KI solution that were delivered to
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania-mostly too late tohave been effective if the Three Mile Island
accident had become an uncontained meltdown
- were storedin secretina warehouse, andwere
never used.
Sincethisfamous 1979accident,thatinjured
no one, the Governorsofthe50 stateshavebeen
given the responsibility.for protecting Ameri-
cans againstradioiodinesbyprovidingprophy-
lactic potassium iodide. By May of 1986, only in
Tennessee have Americans, other than some
specialists,beengivenpotassiumiodidetablets;
aroundonenuclearreactorsome7,500 residents
have been given the officially approved KI
tablets, to assure their having this protection if
a nuclear accident occurs.
In April of 1982 the Bureau of Radiological
Health and Bureau of Drugs, Food and Drug
Administration, Department of Health and
HumanServicesreleased"FINALRECOMMEN-
DATIONS, Potassium Iodide As A Thyroid-
Blocking Agent In A Radiation Emergency:
Recommendations On Use". These lengthy rec-
ommendations are summarized in the FDA's
"mandated patient product insert". (See a com-
plete copy in the following section.) This insert
is packed with every bottle ofnon-prescription
KI tablets sold. However, the lengthy FDA
recommendations contain many facts not men-
tioned in this required insert, including the
following: "Based on the FDA adverse reaction
reports and an estimated 48 x 106 [48 million]
300-mgdoses of potassium iodide administered
each year [in the United States], the NCRP
[National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurements] estimated an adverse reaction
rate of from 1 in a million to 1 in 10 million
doses." (Note that this extremely low adverse
reaction rate is for doses over twice as large as
the 130-mg prophylactic dose.