. Several years
ago, out of the approximately 3,100 evacuation
plans required nationwide, about 1,500had been
made, andthese involvedonly aboutonethirdof
Americans living in risk areas. By 1986 some
cities and states had abandonedtheirwar-crisis
evacuation plans; most still have plans that
would save millions if ordered in time during a
crisis lasting at least a few days and completed
beforetheattack. Who wouldorderanevacuation
under threat of attack, and under what circum-
stances, remainunansweredquestions. Further-
more, compulsory evacuation during a war
crisis was not and is not part of any official
American evacuation plan. So, if you believe
that a nuclear attack on the United States is
possible and want to improve your chances of
surviving, then well before a desperate crisis
arises you had better either make preparations
to improve your and your family's survival
chances at or near where you live, or plan and
prepare to evacuate.
Spontaneous evacuations, in which Ameri-
cans would make their own decisions without
the authorities havingrecommended anymove-
ment, probably wouldoccurduringa worsening
warcrisis. Trafficjamsand othercomplications
are less likely to occur if citizens start leaving
high-risk areas on their own, over a period of
several hours to a few days, rather than if
almost everyone, on receiving recommenda-
tions from officials, at once begins a poorly
controlledevacuation. (Spontaneousevacuation
by Gulf Coast residents, begun under threat of
an approaching hurricane, have lessened sub-
sequent traffic problems in the evacuations
ordered or recommended by officials several
hours later.)
Exceptinareaswherethelocalcivildefense
war-crisisevacuationplansarewelldeveloped,
most Americans living farther than 10 miles
from the nearest probable separate target prob-
ablycanbestimprovetheirchancesof surviving
a nuclear attack by preparing to remain at or
near their homes and there to make or improve
good shelters. Exceptions include those living
in the vicinity of targets of great military
importance to the Soviets - especially our
missile fields, on which many warheads would
be surface or near-surface bursted, producing
extremely heavy fallout for up to 150 miles
downwind. Americans living in these greatly
endangered areas would do well to make their
plans in keeping with the local official civil
defense evacuation plans, at least regarding
directions and distances to localities not likely
to be endangered by heavy fallout.
Nuclear submarine ports, Strategic Air
Command bases, and Air Force installations
with long runways also would be destroyed by
even a limitedSovietcounterforceordisarming
attack. These prime strategic assets are likely
to be blasted by Submarine Launched Ballistic
Missiles (SLBMs) inthefirst 15or20 minutes of
the war. SLBM warheads are not as accurate as
ICBM warheads, and air bursts can destroy
bombers and submarines in port over about
twice as large areas as if these same weapons
are exploded at or near the surface. Therefore,
SLBM warheads probably would be air bursted
on these prime "soft" targets, with little or no
local fallout. (In an all-out Soviet attack, hours
later long runways are likely to be cratered by
accurate ICBM warheads and by bombs, to
make sure our returning bombers could not use
them.)
On the following page are listed considera-
tions, favorable andunfavorable,toevacuation.
These comparativelistsmayhelpyou andyour
family make a more logical decision regarding
evacuation:Favorable to Evacuation:
* You live In a highest-risk or high-risk
area.
* You have transportation (this means a car
and enough gasoline), and roads are open to a
considerably lower-risk area.
* You are in fairly good health or can
evacuate with someone capable of taking care of
you.
* Your work is not of the kind that your
community depends on (such as a policeman, fire-
man, or telephone operator).
* You have some tools with which to build or im-
prove a fallout shelter. You also have water con-
tainers, food, clothing, etc., adequate for lifein the
area to which you would go.
Instructions for building expedient fallout and
blast shelters and for making expedient life-support
equipment are given in following chapters. The
reader is advised to study all of this book carefully
before making up his mind regarding basic survival
action.
