touching each other, until all walls are com-
pleted. When placing the wall poles, keep them
vertical by alternately putting a butt and a top
end uppermost. Wall poles can be held In
position by backfilling and tamping about a foot
of earth against their lower ends, or they can be
wired in position until backfilled.
23. Besure to use the two 5-in.-diameter poles (6 ft 2
in. long) by placing one next to the top and the
other next to the bottom of each of the main
doorways to the room. Study the drawings. Use
braces, each 2 ft 3 in. long, to hold apart the top
and bottom of each doorway-thus making sure
that a 24-in.-wide air pump can swing in either
doorway.
24. To prevent earth from coming through the
cracks between wall poles; cover the walls withcloth, plastic, rugs, roofing, or even cardboard. If
none of these are available, use sticks, twigs, or
grass to cover the wider cracks.
25. After all horizontal bracing and vertical wall
poles are in place, begin backfilling, puttingearth
between the walls and trench sides. Pay particu-
lar attention to the order of filling. The earth fill
behind all the walls must be brought up quite
evenly, so that the earth fill behind one side is no
more than 12 in. higher at anyone time than the
earth on the opposite side. Lightly tamp theearth
fill in 6-in. layers. A pole makes a good tamper;
do not use a mechanical tamper.
26. Next, lay the roof poles side by side, touching
each other on top ofthe wall poles. Coverat least
the larger cracks with plastic, roofing, boards, or
sticks to keep earth from falling through. If the
earth is sandy, cover the whole roof with some
material such as bedsheets or plastic to keep
sand from running through the cracks.
CAUTION: Do not try to rainproofthis flat roof
and simply cover it with earth. If you do, water
will seep straight through the loose earth cover,
puddle on the flat roofing material, and leak
through the joints between pieces of roofing
material or through small holes.
27. Mound earth over the shelter, piling it about 15
in. deep along the centerline of the roof and
sloping it toward the sides of the roof, so that the
earth is only about 2 in. deep over the ends ofthe
roof poles. (Preparatory to moundingearth onto
the roof, place gradestakes in position so you will
be able to know the locations and depths of roof
poles as you cover them.) Continue these slopes
to two side drainage ditches. Smooth this
mounded earth with a rake or stick and remove
any sticks or rocks likely to puncture the
rainproof roofing material to be laid on it.
28. Place rainproofing material on top of the
smooth, mounded earth-as shown in sections of
the drawings in Fig. A.3.l--to make a "buried
roof." Plastic film, such as 4-mil polyethylene, is
preferable. Roofing material, plastic shower
curtains and tablecloths, or canvas can also be
used. Be sure to overlap adjoining pieces.
29. Place the rest of the earth cover over the shelter,
being sure that the corners of the shelter have at
least 21/2 ft of earth over them. Mound the dirt,
smoothing its surface so that water will tend to
run off to the surface drainage ditches which
should be dug all around the edges of the
mounded earth.
30. Build the benches and overhead bunks. Ifboards
are available, use them; if not, use small, straight
poles. On each side, build a row of benches and
bunks 9 ft long, centered in the shelter. In order
to use the shelter space to the greatestadvantage,
make the heights and widths of the benches and
bunks the same as the thoroughly tested heights
(14 in. and 4 ft 5 in.) and widths (16 in. and 24 in.)
given by Fig. A.3.2. Also be sure to space their
vertical supports 3 ft apart-so two adults can sit
between each pair of vertical bunk supports.
31. Narrow the ends of the overhead bunks so that
the aisle between them is about 28 in. wide for a
distance of38 in. from each doorway. 