 meters, or dose-rate meters, measure the dose
rate by recording the number of R being received per
hour at the time of measurement. Notice that it takes
about seven times as long for the dose rate to decay
ORNL·DWG 78-6265
48
HOURS AFTER THE EXPLOSION
Fig. 1.2. Decay of the dose rate of radiation from fallout, from the time
of the explosion, not from the time of fallout deposition.from 1000roentgens per hour (1000 R/ hr) to 10R/hr
(48 hours) as to decay from 1000 Rj hr to 100R/hr(7
hours). (Only in high-fallout areas would the dose
rate I hour after the explosion be as high as 1000
roentgens per hour.)
If the dose rate I hour after an explosion is 1000
R hr, it would take about 2weeks for the dose rate to
be reduced to I R/ hr solely as a result of radioactive
decay. Weathering effects will reduce the dose rate
further; for example, rain can wash fallout particles
from plants and houses to lower positions on or
closer to the ground. Surrounding objects would
reduce the radiation dose from these low-lying
particles.
Figure 1.2 also illustrates the fact that at a
typical location where agiven amount offalloutfrom
an explosion is deposited later than I hour after the
explosion, the highest dose rate and the total dose
received at that location are less than at a location
where the same amount of fallout isdeposited I hour
after the explosion. The longer fallout particles have
been airborne before reaching the ground, the less
dangerous is their radiation.
Within two weeks after an attack the occupants
of most shelters could safely stop using them, or
could work outside the shelters for an increasing
number of hours each day. Exceptions would be in
areas of extremely heavy fallout such as might occur
downwind from important targets attacked with
many weapons, especially missile sites and very large
cities. To know when to come out safely, occupants
either would need a reliable fallout meter to measure
the changing radiation dangers, or must receive
information based on measurements made nearby
with a reliable instrument.
The radiation dose that will kill a person varies
considerably with different people. A dose of 450 R
resulting from exposure of the whole body to fallout
radiation is often said to be the dose that will kill
about half the persons receiving it, although most
studies indicate that it would take somewhat less.'
(Note: A number written after a statement refers the
reader to a source listed in the Selected References
that follow Appendix D.) Almost all persons
confined to expedient shelters after a nuclear attack
would be under stress and without clean surround-
ings or antibiotics to fight infections. Many also
would lack adequate water and food. Under these
unprecedented conditions, perhaps half the persons
who received a whole-body dose of 350 R within a few
days would die.'
Fortunately, the human body can repair most
radiation damage if the daily radiation doses are not
too large. As will be explained in Appendix B, a
person who is healthy and has not been exposed in
the past two weeks to a total radiation dose of more
than 100 R can receive a dose of 6 R each day for at
least two months without being incapacitated.
Only a very small fraction of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki citizens who survived radiation doses-
some of which were nearly fatal-have suffered
serious delayed effects. The reader should realize that
to do essential work after a massive nuclear attack,
many survivors must be willing to receive much
larger radiation doses than are normally permissible.
Otherwise, too many workers would stay inside
shelter too much of the time, and work that would be
vital to national recovery could not be done. For
example, if the great majority of truckers were so
fearful of receiving even non-incapacitating radiation
doses that they would refuse to transport food,
additional millions would die from starvation alone.
• Myth: Fallout radiation penetrates everything;
there is no escaping its deadly effects.
• Facts: Some gamma radiation from fallout will
penetrate the shielding materials of even an excellent
shelter and reach its occupants. However, the
radiation dose' that the occupants of an excellent
shelter would receive while inside this shelter can be
reduced to a dose smaller than the average American
receives during his lifetime from X rays and other
radiation exposures normal in America today. 