elter. For example, near the inner door of the
shelter illustrated by Figs. 17.1 and 17.2 the
protection factor is lessthan 1000. Butifenough
filled water containers are placed so as to cover
the door with almost the equivalent of an 18-
inch-thick "wall" of shielding water, the PF of
the partofthe shelter room nearthe doorcan be
raised to about PF 1000.
If a shelter has twenty-seven 5-gallon cans
ofwaterstoredonand undertheabove-described
2-shelf water storage stand, then in less than 3
minutes 2 men can shield the shelter door quite
adequately. All they have to do is take the 18
cans off the shelves, put 9 of them on the floor
againstthe door and doorway, movethe storage
stand over the 9 door-shielding cans, and place
the remaining 18 cans on the stand's 2 shelves.
Equally good doorway shielding can be
providedbyplacingatleasta 24-inch thickness
of containers full of dense food, such as whole-
grainwheator sugar, againstthedoorway. Two
55-gallon drums of wheat, each weighing about
400 pounds, can be quickly "walked" on a con-
crete floor and positioned so as to shield the
lower part of a doorway. Heavy containers on
the floor can provide a stable base on which to
stack other shielding material.
• A water well: The best solution to the water
problem quite often is a well inside the shelter.
In many areasthe watertable islessthan50 feet
belowthe surface, and a 50-foot well, casedwith
6-inch steel pipe, can be drilled and completed
for about $2000. Well drilling should be done
after the shelter excavation has been dug and
beforetheconcreteshelterfloorhas beenpoured.
An in-shelter well would be of vital importance
notonly to the occupants ofa family shelter, but
later on probably to nearby survivors. Even if
only a gallon or so an hour could be bailed froma well too weak to be useful in peacetime, it
wouldbe a tremendousfamily assetpost-attack.
Ifinfectiveorganismsarefound inwaterfrom a
welldrilledto providewaterduringandafteran
attack, safe water for months can be assured by
merely storing a few gallons of household
chlorine bleach.
If enough water for 'worthwhile peacetime
use can be pumped from a well, install a sub-
mersible electric pump, with plastic pipe in the
well. Then in an emergency the pipe and the
attached pump can be pulled by hand out ofthe
well, with only a saw being needed to cut off
lengths of the plastic pipe as it is pulled. After
the well casing has been cleared of pump, pipe
and wires, ahomemade 2-foot-Iong bail-bucket
on a nylon rope can be used-to draw plenty of
water. (See Chapter 8, Water, for instructions.)
• Local water sources: Most Americans' nor-
mal piped water would not run for months after
a large nuclear attack. A month's supply of
waterstoredinyoursheltershouldbeadequate, .
because, even ifyour area has heavy fallout, in
less than a month radioactive decay will make
it safe to haul water from nearby sources.
An important part ofyour shelter prepara-
tions is to locate nearby wells, ponds, streams,
and streambeds that when dry frequently have
water a foot or two below the surface. The
author has found that digging a water pit in an
apparentlydry streambedoftensuppliesenough
filtered water to satisfy several families' basic
needs. To keep the sides of a water pit dug in
unstable ground from caving in, you should
drive a circle of side-by-side stakes around the
outside of your planned pit before starting to
dig. With more work and materials, you and
othersurvivorsneedingfiltered watercoulddig
a well like the Chinese water source shown on
page 71. If you are in a fallout area, before
drinking water from a water. pit you should
filter it through clayey soil to remove fallout
particles and dissolved radioactive isotopes, as
described in the Water chapter. Of course it is
prudent to chlorinate or boil all surface and
near-surface water after it has been filtered.
