 intersection of the
vertical column of numbers
under the time interval used
and of the horizontal line of
numbers that lists the calcu-
lated difference in readings at
its left end.
An example: Ifthe time interval of the exposure was 1 MIN. and the
difference inthe readings was 12mm, the table shows that the dose rate
during the time interval of the exposure was 9.2 R/HR (9.2 roentgens
per hour).
Anotherexample: Ifthe time intervalofthe exposure was 15SEC.and
the difference in readings was 11mm, the table showsthatthe dose rate
during the exposure was halfway between 31 R/HR and 37 R/HR;
that is, the dose rate was 34 RI hr.
9.
B. Finding the Dose Rate
1. Reread Section IV,"Whata KFM Isand How it Works."Also reread
Section XIII. "Two Ways to Charge a KFM," and actually do each
step immediately after reading it.
2. Chargethe KFM sothat it reads atleast 15mm. Nextraise the
lower end of the charging wire. Then gently bump or shake
the KFM to remove any unstable part of the charge. Read the
apparentseparationof the loweredgesof the leaveswhile the
KFM rests on an approximately horizontal surface. If the
reading is larger than 20 mm, bleed off enough charge to
reduce the initial reading to 20 mm or slightly less, for
maximum accuracy. Never take a reading while a leaf is
touching a stop-thread.
3. To prevent possible contamination of a KFM (or of any other fallout
meter) with fallout particles, keep it inside a plastic bag or other
covering whenthere isrisk offallout particles beingdeposited or blown
onto it. An instrumentcontaminated withfallout particles can givetoo
high readings, especially of the low dose-rate measurements made
inside a good shelter.
In places where fallout arrives several hours after the explosion, the
radioactivity of the fallout will have gone through its time period of.most
rapid decay while the fallout particles were still airborne. If you are in a
location so distant from the explosion that fallout arrives 8 hours after the
explosion, two days must pass before the initial dose rate measured at
your location willdecay to 1/10 its initial intensity.
Most fortunately for the future of all livitlg things. the decay of
radioactivity causes the sandlike fallout particleS to become less and less
dangerous with the passage oftime. Each fallout particle acts much like a
tiny Xray machine would if it were made so that its rays. shooting out
from it likeinvisible light. became weaker and weaker with time.
Contrary to exaggerated accounts of fallout dangers, the radiation dose
rate from fallout particles when they reach the ground in the areas of the
heaviest fallout will decrease quite rapidly. For example, consider the
decay of fallout from a relatively nearby, large surface burst, at a place
where the fallout particles are deposited on the ground one hour after the
explosion. At this time one hour after the explosion, assume that the
radiation dose rate (the best measure of radiation danger at a particular
time) measures 2,000 roentgens per hour (2,000 R/hr) outdoors. Seven
hours later the dose rate is reduced to 200 R/hr by normal radioactive
decay. Twodays after the explosion, the dose rate outdoors is reduced by
radioactive decay to 20R/hr. After twoweeks, the dose rate is less than 2
R/hr. When the dose rate is 2 Rzhr, people can go out of a good shelter
and workoutdoors for 3 hours a day, receiving a daily dose of 6 roentgens.
without being sickened.CJ)
a..
CJ)
a..II.
12.
Note in the table that if an exposure for one ofthe listed time
intervals causes the dJfference in readings to be 2 mm or 3
mrn, then an exposure 4times as long reveals the same dose
rate. An example: If a 1-min exposure results in a
difference in readings of2 mm, the table shows the dose rate
was 1.6 R/hr; then if the KFM is exposed for 4 minutes at
this same dose rate of 1.6 R/hr, the table shows that the
resultant difference in readings is 8 mm.
The longer exposure results in a more accurate
determination ofthe dose rate.
Ifthe dose rate isfound to be greater than 0.