 tested heights
(14 in. and 4 ft 5 in.) and widths (16 in. and 24 in.)
given by Fig. A.3.2. Also be sure to space their
vertical supports 3 ft apart-so two adults can sit
between each pair of vertical bunk supports.
31. Narrow the ends of the overhead bunks so that
the aisle between them is about 28 in. wide for a
distance of38 in. from each doorway. This allows
room for installation and operation of an
expedient air pump (a KAP) for prevention of
dangerous overheating in warm weather.
32. Place a canopy (open on all sides) over each
entrance, to minimize the entry of sand-like
fallout particles or rain.
33. To improve the floor, lay small poles between the
lower brace poles, so that the floor is approxi-
mately level. Or, use sticks covered with scrap
boards.
34. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all waterstored in expedientcontainers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,'
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water.
Even ifonly muddy water isavailable, store it. If
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible
to boil water when needed.
35. Put all of your emergency tools inside your
shelter.
36. Astime and materials permit, continue to improve
your chances of surviving by doing as many of the
following things as possible:
(I) Make a homemade fallout meter, as described
in Appendix C, and expedient lights.
(Prudent people will have made these
extremely useful items well ahead of
time.)
(2) Install screens or mosquito netting over the
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a
problem. Remember, however, that screen or
netting reduces the air flow through a shelter
- even when the air ispumped through with a
KAP.EXPEDIENT VENTILAnON AND COOLING
(Those workers who are to work only on the
shelter itself, if pushed for time, need not read this
section before beginning their work.)
Install a KAP (one that is 24 in. wide and 36 in.
high) near the top of the doorway through which you
can feel air naturally flowing into the shelter room at
that time. (If the direction of the natural air flow
changes, move the KAP to the other opening.) To
enable the KAP to efficiently pump fresh air from the
outdoors all the way through the shelter, block the
lower half of the doorway in which the KAP is
installed with a quickly removable covering, such as a
plastic-covered frame made of sticks. Be sure to
connect the KAP's pullcord only II· in. below its
hinge line. This prevents excessive arm motions
which would cause unnecessary fatigue.
If short of time or materials, make a small
Directional Fan.
In windy or cold weather, control the natural
flow of air through the shelter by hanging adjustable
curtains in the doorways at both ends, and/or by
making and using trapdoors on the tops of the
verticalentryways. For adjustable curtains, use
pieces of plastic, each with a supporting stick
attached to its upper edge. This allows for different-
sized openings in the doorways: (1)an opening under
the lower edge of the adjustable curtain at the air-
intake end of the room, and (2) an opening over the
top of the curtain at the air-exhaust end of the room.
In cold weather, this arrangement usually will
provide adequate chimney-type ventilation for the
shelter without using an air pump.c
.-J
CAUTION:
ALL DIAMETERS GIVEN FOR POLES
ARE FOR THE SMALL END OF THE
POLE AND ARE THE MINIMUM SIZE
THAT SHOULD BE USED.
4·in, 01..... X6ft·3in.
~
4·t/1 ClAM POLES. EACH
6ft-tO,n LONG. ABOVE
AND BELOW DOORWAY
(CANOPY NOT SHOWN)
ENO WALL POLES l8ELOW ANDABOVE OOQftWA'T)
4~ln. ClAM XSft·tOift
STOOP-IN ENTRY3~ -in, OIAM X 31!- lOin, LONGPOLES
FINISH FILL LINE
,- I I I ""-""-...L.. 2 fI • I .." I _.. I -,. ~".•
au-a:«. 