 supply of easily
transportable foods. In any case, occupants of
shelters would be uncertain about when they could
get more food and would have to make hard decisions
about how much to eat each day. (Those persons
who have a fallout meter, such as the homemade
instrument described in Chapter 10, could estimate
when and for how long they could emerge from
shelter to find food. As a result, these persons could
ration their limited foods more effectively.)
During the first few weeks of a food crisis, lack
of vitamins and other essentials of a well-balanced
diet would not be of primary importance to pre-
viously well-nourished people. Healthful foods with
enough calories to provide adequate energy would
meet short-term needs. If water is in short supply,
high-protein foods such as meat are best eaten onlyin moderation, since a person eating high-protein
foods requires more water than is needed when
consuming an equal number of calories from foods
high in carbohydrates.
EXPEDIENT PROCESSING OF GRAINS
AND SOYBEANS
Whole-kernelgrains or soybeans cannot be eaten
in sufficient quantities to maintain vigor and health if
merely boiled or parched. A little boiled whole-kernel
wheat is a pleasantly chewy breakfast cereal, but
experimenters at Oak Ridge got sore tongues and very
loose bowels when they tried to eat enough boiled
whole-kernel wheat to supply even half of their daily
energy needs. Some pioneers, however, ate large
quantities of whole-kernelwheatwithoutharm-
ful results after boiling and simmering it for
many hours. Even the most primitive peoples who
subsist primarily on grains grind or pound them
into a meal or paste before cooking. (Rice is the only
important exception.) Few Americans know how to
process whole-kernel grains and soybeans (our largest
food reserves) into meal. ThISignorance could be fatal
to survivors of a nuclear attack.
Making an expedient metate, the hollowed-out
grinding stone of Mexican Indians, proved im-
practical under simulated post-attack conditions.
Pounding grain into meal with a rock or a capped,
solid-ended piece of pipe is extremely slow work.
The best expedient means developed and field-tested
for pounding grain or beans into meal and flour is
an improvised 3-pipe grain mill. Instructions for
making and using this effective grain-pounding
device follow.
piece of pipe with cushioning, slip-prevent-
ing tape, string or cloth-in the locations
illustrated.
(4) Tape or otherwise bind the 3 pipes into a secure
bundle so that their working ends are as even as
possible and are in the same plane-resting
evenly on a flat surface.
(5) Cut the top smoothly out of a large can. A
4-inch-diameter, 7-inch-high fruit-juice can is
ideal. If you do not have a can, improvise some-
thing to keep grain together while pounding it.
ORNL-DWG 73-11449
SLlP- .
PREVENTING
TAPE OR
STRING
AROUND
EACH PIPE----l-----'r
30 in.
1in. OF GRAIN IN A CAN RESTING ON
A HARD, SMOOTH, SOLID SURFACE
Sin.
t
2in.
CAN-
TAPE OR
STRING
BINDING ALL
3 PIPES
TOGETHER
Improvised Grain Mill
The grain mill described can efficiently pound
whole-grain wheat, corn, etc., into meal and
flour-thereby greatly improving digestibility and
avoiding the diarrhea and sore mouths that would
result from eating large quantities of unground
gram.
(I) Cut 3 lengths of pipe, each 30 inches long;
3 r-inch-diameter steel pipe (such as ordinary
water pipe) is best.
(2) Cut the working ends of the pipe off squarely.
Remove all roughness, leaving the full-wall
thickness. Each working end should have the full
diameter of the pipe.
(3) In preparation for binding the three pieces of
pipe together into a firm bundle, encircle each
TO BUILD:TO MAKE MEAL AND FLOUR:
(I) Put clean, dry grain ONE INCH DEEP in the
can.
(2) To prevent blistering your hands, wear gloves,
or wrap cloth around the upper part of the
bundle of pipes.
(3) Place the can (or open-ended cylinder) on a hard,
smooth, solid surface, such as concrete.
(4) To pound the grain, sit with the can held between
your feet. 