, or plywood at least3/4-inch thick, also can
be used to roof this shelter and to support its
overhead earth shielding.
Warning: Somedoors with single-thickness
panels if loaded with earth will break before
they bend enough to result in protective earth
arching.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
For a typical family orothergroup withtwo
or more members able to work hard for most of
36 hours. Very littlebuildingskill isneeded. (An
urban family of six, with 14- and 12-year-old
sons and 13- and 9-year-old daughters, com-
pleted this shelter, sized for six persons, in one
longworkingday: 13hours and43 minutes after
receiving the step-by-step, will illustrated in-
structions at their Florida home 10 miles from
the rural building site. This family used its
pickup truck to carry them, the interior doors,
and other survival items.)
CAPACITY
The shelter illustrated in Fig. A.4 is the
minimum length for 4 persons. It is roofed with 6
doors.
For each additional person, add another door.
(If more than about 7 persons are to be sheltered,
build 2 or more separate shelters.)
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
1. Before beginning work, study the drawing and
read ALL of the following instructions. Divide the
work so that some will be digging while others are
building an air pump, storing water, etc. CHECK
OFF EACH STEP WHEN COMPLETED.
2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed a ventilating pump (a 16-in.-wide by 24-
in.-high KAP-essential except in cold weather) and
the storage of 15gallons of water per occupant. (See
Appendix B and Chapter 8.)
3. Start to assemble the materials and tools needed.
For the illustrated 4-person shelter, these are:
A. Essential Materials and Tools
• Six doors. Boards or plywood at least 5/8_
in. thick can be used to replace one or more of
the doors.
• At least 4 double-bed sheets for each of
the first four persons, and 3 double-bed
sheets for each additional person to be
sheltered-or enough pieces of fabric and/or
of plastic to cover at least as large an area as
the sheets would cover. (This material is for
making aboveground shelter walls, to serve
as sand bags.)
• Rainproofing materials (plastic film,
shower curtains, plastic tablecloths, mattress
protectors,etc.)-I5square yards for the first
4 persons and 21/2 square yards for each
additional person.• A shovel (one shovel for each two
workers isdesirable). Apick or mattock ifthe
ground is very hard.
• A knife (the only essential tool for
making a small shelter-ventilating KAP) and
materials for a KAP 16 in. wide and 24 in.
high. (See Appendix 8.)
• Containers for storing water. (See
Chapter 8.)
B. UsefulMaterials andTools
• Two or more buckets, large cans and/or
large pots with bail handles-s-to carry earth,
and later to store water or wastes.
• Saw (or ax or hatchet)-to cut a few
boards or small poles.
• Hammer and at least 15 small nails (at
least ih in. long).
• Tape measure, yardstick,or ruler.
• Additional cloth and/or plastic-equiv-
alent in size to 2 more double-bed sheets for
each person.
• Additional waterproof material-2
more square yards per person.
• Pillowcases, or cloth or plastic bags-to
serve as earth-filled sand bags. The more, the
better.
4. To save time and work, sharpen all tools and
keep them sharp.
5. Wear gloves from the start, to help prevent.
blisters and infections.
6. Select a building site where there is little or no
chance of the ground being covered with water,
and where the water table (groundwater level) is
not likely to rise closer than 18 inches to the
surface.
7. To avoid the extra work of diggingamong roots,
select a site away from trees, if practical.
8. To lessen the dangers of fire and smoke from
nearby houses or trees that might catch fire,
locate your shelter as far as is practical from
houses and flammable vegetation.
9. Before staking out your shelter, provide one door
per person to roof the main room plus one
additional door for each of the two entries. Be
sure the door knobs have been removed. 