 that would be impossible
otherwise. Trembling hands, weak legs, and cold
sweat do not mean that a person has become
ineffective. Doing hard, necessary work isone of the
best ways to keep one's fears under control.
Brave men and women who are self-confident
admit their fears, even when the threat of death is
remote. Then they plan and work to lessen the causes
of their fears. (When the author helped Charles A.
Lindbergh design a reinforced-concrete blast shelter
for his family and neighbors, Lindbergh frankly
admitted that hefeared both nuclearattackand being
trapped. He was able to lessen both of these fears by
building an excellent blast shelter with two escape
openings.)
TERROR
If the danger is unexpected enough or great
enough, normal persons sometimesexperience terror
as well as fear. Terror prevents the mind from
evaluatingdangersand thinking logically. Itdevelops
in two stages, which have been described by Dr. Walo
von Gregerz, a physician with much war experience,
in his book Psychology ofSurvival. The first stage is
apathy: people become indifferentto their own safety
and are unable even to try to save themselves or their
families. The second stage is a compulsion to flee.
Anxiety, fear, and terror can result insymptoms
very similar to those caused by radiation injury:
nausea, vomiting, extreme trembling, diarrhea. Dr.
von Gregerz has described terror as being "explo-
sively contagious." However, persons who learn to
understand the nature of our inherent human traits
and behavior and symptoms are lesslikely to become
terrorized and ineffective in the event of a nuclear
attack.
EMOTIONAL PARALYSIS
The most common reaction to great danger is
not terror, but a kind of numbing of the emotions
which actually may be helpful. Dr. von Gregerz calls
this "emotional paralysis."This reaction allows many
persons, when in the grip of great danger, to avoid
being overwhelmed by compassionate emotions andhorrible sights. It permits them to think clearly and
act effectively.
ATOM BOMB SURVIVORS
The atomic explosions that destroyed most of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki were air bursts and
therefore produced no deadly local fallout. So we
cannot be sure how people would behave in areas
subjected to both blast and fallout from surface
bursts. However, the reactions of the Japanese
survivors are encouraging, especially in view of the
fact that among them the relative numberof horribly
burned people was greater than is likely to be found
amonga population that expects a nuclearattack and
takes any sort of shelter. Dr. von Gregerz summa-
rizes: "In most cases the victims were, of course,
apathetic and often incapable of rational action, but
open panic or extremely disorganized behavior
occurred only in exceptional cases among the
hundreds of thousands ofsurvivors of the two atomic
bombing attacks." Also encouraging: "... serious
permanent psychological derangements were rare
after the atomic bomb attacks, just as they wereafter
the large-scale conventional bombings."
HELP FROM FELLOW AMERICANS
Some maintain that after an atomic attack
America would degenerate into anarchy-s-an every-
man-for-himself struggle for existence. They forget
the history of great human catastrophes and the self-
sacrificing strengths most human beings are capable
of displaying. After a massive nuclear attack
starvation would afflict some areas, but America's
grain-producing regions still would have an abun-
dance of uncontaminated food. History indicates
that Americans in the food-rich areas would help the
starving. Like the heroic Russians who drove food
trucks to starving Leningrad through bursting Nazi
bombs and shells;' many Americans would risk
radiation and other dangers to bring truckloads of
grain and other necessities to their starving country-
men. Surely, an essential part of psychological
preparations for surviving a modern war is a well-
founded assurance that many citizens of a strong
society will struggle to help each other and will work
together with little regard for danger and loss.Chapter 3
Warnings and Communications
IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE WARNING
When Hiroshima and Nagasaki were blasted by
the first nuclear weapons ever to be used in war, very
few of the tens of thousands of Japanese killed or
injured were inside their numerous air raid shelters.
The single-plane attacks caught them by surprise.
People are not saved by havingshelters nearby unless
they receive warning in time to reach their shelters-
and unless they heed that warning.
