 to prevent or
reducethyroiddamage underpeacetime orwar-
time conditions:
* Do not drink or otherwise use fresh milk
produced by cows that have consumed feed or116
water consequentially contaminated with fall-
outorotherradioactive material resultingfrom
a peacetimeaccidentorfrom nuclearexplosions
in a war.
* As a general rule, do not eat fresh vege-
tables until advised it is safe to do so. If under
wartime conditions no official advice is obtain-
able, avoid eating fresh leafy vegetables that
were growing or exposed at the time of fallout
deposition; thoroughly wash all vegetables and
fruits.
* If a dangerously radioactive air mass is
being blown toward your area and is relatively
small (as from some possible nuclear power
facility accidents), andif thereistime, an ordered
evacuation of your area may make it unneces-
sary even to take potassium iodide.
* For protection against inhaled radioactive
iodine, theFDAFinalRecommendations(which
are mentioned in the preceding section) state
that the following measures "should be con-
sidered":" ... sheltering[merelystayingindoors
cansignificantly reduce inhaleddoses], evacua-
tion, respiratory protection, and/or the use of
stable iodide."
Research has beencarried outin an effortto
develop a thyroid protectionprocedure basedon
the ordinary iodine solutions which are used as
disinfectants. Since iodine solutions such as
tincture of iodine and povidone-iodine are dan-
gerous poisons if taken orally, these experi-
ments have utilized absorptionthrough the skin
after topical application on bare skin.
All reported experimental topical applica-
tions on human skin have given less thyroid
protectionthandoes properoral administration
ofpotassium iodide. Moreover, undesirable side
effects of skin application can be serious. For
these reasons researchers to date have not rec-
ommended a procedure for the use of ordinary
iodine solutions for thyroid protection.
Potassium iodide, when obtained in the
crystalline reagent form and used as recom-
mended above on pages 114 and 115, is safe,
inexpensive, and easy to administer. Prudent
individuals should obtain and keep ready for
use an adequate supplyofpotassiurniodidewell
in advance of a crisis.Chapter 14
Expedient Shelter Furnishings
IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE
FURNISHINGS
Throughout history, people have endured being
crowded together while living and sleeping on hard
surfaces. In times of war and privation, people have
lived in such conditionsfor much longerperiods than
would be necessary for shelter occupancy due to
fallout.-Ie Realistic basement-shelter-occupancy tests
conducted by researchcontractorsfor the U.S. Office
of Civil Defense (now the Federal Emergency
Management Agency) have shown that modern
Americans can live and sleep for two weeks on a
concretefloor. Insome ofthese tests, only 8squarefeet
offloor space wasprovided for each person; only pieces
of corrugated cardboard 3/ 16-inchthick lessened the
hardship of sleeping and sitting on concrete.13
Nevertheless, shelters should be adequately
furnished whenever possible, for these reasons:
• More people can occupy a properly furnished
shelter-s-for weeks, if necessary-s-if adequate addi-
tional ventilation is supplied for the additional
occupants.
• Cleanliness, health, and morale are better ifwell-
designed furnishings are used. More serious compli-
cations than discomfort are likely to result if
occupants have to huddle together on a bare
floor-especially if the floor is damp earth.
• Persons occupying a shelter made relatively
comfortable by its furnishings are more likely to stay
in the shelter long enough to avoid dangerous
exposure to fallout radiation.
CHAIRS, BEN~HES, AND BUNKS
The father of the previously described Utah
family of six knew that the members of his family
would be most uncomfortable and probably would
have sore backs if they spent the required 72hours of
continuous shelter occupancy huddled on the floor.
(Their shelter room was only 31/2 feet wide and 161/2
feet Iong.) So this family took with them from home
four folding chairs and two pieces of plywood (each
21 inches wide by 6 feet long) tied as part of the load
on top of the family car. Four small wooden boxes
served as food containers during the drive to the
shelter-building site. 