 nations with nuclear weapons increases -
especially in the Middle East - this generally
unrecognizeddangertoAmericans willworsen.
Trans-Pacific warfallout, carriedto anAmerica
at peace by the prevailing west-to-east winds
that blow around the world, could be several
hundred times more dangerous to Americans
than fallout from the worst possible overseas
nuclearpowerreactoraccident, andmanytimes
more dangerous than fallout from a very im-
probableU.S. nuclearpowerreactoraccidentas
lethal asthedisastrous Chernobylaccidentwas
to Russians.
Fig. 1 is a map showing fallout from a
single above ground Chinese nuclear test ex-
plosion("afew hundredkilotons") onDecember
ORNL DWG, 73-4611
Fig. 1.The Fifth Chinese Nuclear Test was Detonated on Dec. 28, 1966.It"involved thermonuclear material,"and,
according to the AEC press release, was a "nuclear test in the atmosphere at their test site near Lop Nor." As indicated
above, by the end of Dec. 31, 1966 the leading edge of its fallout cloud extended as far east as the dotted line shown
running from Arizona to the Great Lakes.28, 1966. It produced fallout that by January 1,
1967 resulted in the fallout cloud covering most
of the UnitedStates.This one Chineseexplosion
produced about 15 million curies of iodine-131
- roughly the same amount as the total release
of iodine-131 into the atmosphere from the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster. (The
LawrenceLivermoreNationalLaboratory'spre-
liminaryestimateis that.l0-50 million curies of
iodine-131 were released during the several
days of the Chernobyl disaster; in contrast, its
estimate of the iodine-131 released during the
ThreeMile Islandnuclearpowerplantaccident,
the worst commercial nuclear power plant ac-
cident in American history, is about 20 curies.)
Fig. 1isfrom anOakRidge NationalLabora-
tory report, Trans-Pacific Fallout and Protective
Countermeasures (ORNL-4900), written by the
author of this book in 1970, but not published
until 1973. No classified information was used
in any version of this report, that summarized
findings of the unclassified Trans-Pacific Fall-
out Seminar funded by the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission. This seminar' was attended by
expertswhocamefrom severalresearchorgani-
zations and deliberated at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory for two days in March of 1970.
Later in 1970 a final draft of this report was
submitted to Washington for approval before
publication. It was promptly classified. Publi-
cation without censorship was not permitted
until after it was declassified in its entirety in
1973. None of the recommendations in this
pioneering report were acted upon, but many of
them are given in this chapter.
The findings and conclusions of the above
mentioned 1970OakRidge NationalLaboratory
Trans-Pacific Fallout Seminar, summarized in
the 1973 report, were confirmed by a later, more
comprehensive study, Assessment and Control of
the Transoceanic Fallout Threat, byH. Lee andW.E.
Strope (1974; 117 pages), Report EGU 2981 of
Stanford Research Institute.
Fallout from the approximately 300 kiloton
Chinese test explosion shown in Fig. 1 caused
milk from cows that fed on pastures near Oak
Ridge, Tennessee and elsewhere to be contami-
natedwithradioiodine, althoughnotwithenough
to be hazardous to health. However, this milk
contamination (up to 900 picocuries of radio-
active iodine per liter) and the measured dose
ratesfrom the gammaraysemittedfrom fallout
particles deposited in different parts of the
United States indicate that trans-Pacific fallout
from even an overseas nuclear war in which
"only"two orthreehundredmegatons wouldbe
exploded could result in tens of thousands of
unpreparedAmericans sufferingthyroidinjury.
Unprepared Americans do not have potassium
iodide, the very effective prophylactic medica-
tion to prevent thyroid injury from radioiodine,
andfew could getitduringthe severaldaysthat
it would take trans-Pacific war fallout to reach
the United States. Fortunately, removal of even
a cancerous thyroid rarely is fatal to people
blessed with modern medical facilities.
