, tie another single overhand knot
over the tendon behind the ankle. Finally, tie a
bow knot in front of the ankle.
4. Cover the insulating layer with a tough fabric,
. such as canvas or burlap sack material; secure
with a second strip of cloth and tie as described
above.
If the snow is wet, place a piece of strong plastic
film or coated fabric outside the insulating layer,
after securing it with the first strip ofcloth. The outer
protective covering should be tied over the water-
proofing, with the second strip ofclothsecuringboth
it and the waterproofing. (When resting or sleeping in
a dry place, remove any moistureproof layer in the
foot coverings, to let your feet dry.) Figure 15.6
shows a test subject's waterproofed expedient foot-
covering, held in place as described above, after
a 2-mile hike in wet snow. His feet were warm,
and he had not stopped to tighten or adjust the
cloth strips.
Fig. 15.6. Expedient water-proofed foot-
covering, over a newspapersole and othernewspaper
insulation.
Persons who have not worked outdoors in icy
weather seldom realize the importance of warm
footwear for winter. Russian civil defense manuals
direct urban citizens to take winter boots with them
when they evacuate, even in summer.KEEPING WARM WITHOUT FIRE
• If occupants of a cold room or shelter lack
adequate clothing and bedding, all should lie close
together.
• Always place some insulating material between
your body and a cold floor. (Pieces of shag rug are
excellent.) Plastic film should be placed under the
insulating material if the ground is damp.
• Go to bed or put on all your body insulation
before you begin to feel cold. Once the loss of body
heat causes blood vessels in your hands and feet to
constrict, it often is hard to get these vesselsto return
to normal dilation again.
• Do not jump up and down or wave yourarms to
get or to keep warm. The windchill factor is a
measure of air movement over your skin; rapid body
movements always cause some such air movement. If
practical, lie down and cover up; then do muscular
tension exercises by repeatedly tightening all your
muscles so tight that you tremble.
• Prevent sweating and the dampening of insula-
tion by taking off or opening up clothingas you begin
to exercise, before you begin to sweat.
• If you are getting cold, don't smoke. Nicotine
causes blood vessels to constrict and the flow of
blood to hands and feet to be reduced.
• Don't drink an alcoholic beverage to warm
yourself. Alcohol causes increased blood flow close
to the skin surface, resulting in rapid loss of body
heat. It isimpossible for alcohol to make up for such
loss for very long.
RAINWEAR
All that is needed to make serviceable, impro-
vised rainwear iswaterproofmaterial and waterproof
tape. Plastic film from large trash bags will do; 4-mil
polyethylene is better; tough, lightweight, coated
fabric is best. Fabric duct tape is the best widely
available tape.
Figure 15.7 shows a pair of improvised rain
chaps. Rain chaps are separate leg coverings, each
with a loop to suspend it from one's belt and usually
made large enough to be pulled on and off over the
shoes and trousers. Rain chaps are better than
waterproof trousers for working or walking while
wearing a poncho or raincoat, because body
movements cause drying air to be literally pumped
under the chaps. This air keeps trousers and legsdry,
and therefore warmer.
Fig. 15.7. Improvised rainchaps made oftrash-
bag polyethylene and freezer tape.
Inthe same way, a poncho or rain cape willallow
plenty of air to reach the garments under them while
one is working. When exercise is stopped, clothing
underneath will stay dry and warm for some time.
SANDALS
Shoes are almost always in short supply for
years following a disastrous war. Except in very cold
weather, sandals can be made to serve quitewell.The
best sandal designs for hard work and serious
walking have a strap around the heel and in front of
the ankle, with no thong between the toes (Fig. 15.8).
Fig. 15.8. A Ho Chi Minh Sandal, excellent
Vietnamese expedient footwear. Rubber bands cut
from an inner tube have been inserted into a sole of
auto-tire tread.X' _r----------.,.------,,....