2) checked with a
strong enough radiation source (at no longer
than 3-year intervals) to see if they still are
measuringradiationaccurately,and(3)repaired
if necessary. (To learn whether a dose rate
meter still is functioning, use a radioactive
check source such as Dosimeter Corporation's
Check Source (Model 3001), that eontains 5
microcuries cesium-137 and sells for $35.00.
Thistype of checktestwill proveonlythatyour
instrument measures dose rates slightly above
normal background radiation; it will not prove
that your instrument could accurately measure
the much higher dose rates that will be of vital
concern in a nuclear war. Some instrument
companies will properly calibrate a radiation
measuring instrument that is sent to them. For
example, DosimeterCorporationcharges$50.00
to calibrate a dose rate meter or dosimeter, and
makes needed repairs at an additional cost.)
The reader is advised to buy at least a good
commercial dose rate meter, with which to
quickly measurehighlevels of fallout radiation
-if he can afford one. A family that has a
reliable dose rate meter, and that remains in a
shelter almost all of the time during which
fallout dose rates outdoors are dangerously
high, can calculate with sufficient accuracy the
accumulated dosesreceivedby itsmembers. To
do this, a continuousrecordmustbekeptofdose
ratesandthetimesatwhichthosemeasurements
are made. (Having a reliable dosimeter elimi-
natestheneedfor keepingsuchdetailedrecords
and making these calculations, but if only one
instrument can be afforded it should be a dose
rate meter.) A good commercial instrument, if
properlymaintainedandperiodicallycalibrated
with a radiation source to check its accuracy,
probably will be serviceable for years.
A prudent owner of even an excellent dose
rate meter would do well to make and learn to
use a KFM, the dependable homemakeable fall-
outmeterbrieflydescribedlaterinthis chapter,
withcompleteinstructionsfor makingandusing
it given in Appendix C. Then during a period of
heavy warfallout youcan checkthereadings of
your complex instrument by comparing them
with those of your KFM, and, if the complex
instrument is giving inaccurate readings, your
KFM will meet your basic need.
A HOMEMAKEABLE DOSE RATE METER,
THEKFM
• What is a KFM?
The only do-it-yourselffallout meterthat is
accurate and dependable was invented in 1977.
Itis calledthe KFM (KearnyFalloutMeter);one
is pictured in Fig. 10.1.
Fig. 10.1. A homemade KFM, an accurate dose
rate meter for measuring dose rates from 30 mR/hr
(0.03 R/ hr) up to 43 R/ hr.
This simple instrument has undergone
rigorous scientific testing in several laborato-
ries, including Oak Ridge National Laboratory;
its accuracy and dependability were confirmed.
Many hundreds of KFMs have been made by
untrained people, ranging from members of
junior high school science classes to grand-
mothers making them for their children and
grandchildren. These successful makers have
been guided only by thoroughly field-tested
instructions and patterns not quite as good as
the improved ones given in Appendix C of this
updated book.
Only common materials found in millions
ofhomes areneededto builda KFM. (Ifallofthe
materials, including those for a dry-bucket,
have to be purchased, their total cost in 1986 is
lessthan seventeendollars.)TheKFMservesas
an accurate dose rate meter when used in con-
junction with a watch and the KFM's attached
table relatingchangesinreadingsinlistedtime
intervals to dose rates. No radiation source isneeded either to initially calibrate a KFM or
subsequently to check its accuracy. (Calibra-
tionsfor accuracywerecompleted atOakRidge
National Laboratory and are the basis of the
KFM's attached table.) A KFM is more accurate
than most civil defense instruments, and its
accuracy is permanently established by the
laws of physics applicable to the specified
dimensionsandothercharacteristicsofitsparts,
and to their positioning relative to each other-
providedthatitismadeand maintainedaccord-
ingto the instructions. Unlike all factory-made
radiation measuring civil defense instruments
that are reliable and available today, a KFM is
charged electrostatically. No battery is needed.
