ultraviolet
light would reach the earth's surface. Even
birds and insects would be blinded. Peoplecould
not work outdoors in daytime for years without
dark glasses, andwouldhavetowearprotective
clothing to prevent incapacitating sunburn.
Plants would be badly injured and food produc-
tion greatly reduced.
• Facts: Large nuclear explosions do inject
huge amounts of nitrogen oxides (gasses that
destroy ozone) into the stratosphere. However,
the percentof the stratosphericozonedestroyed
by a given amount of nitrogen oxides has been
greatly overestimated in almost all theoretical
calculations and models. For example, the
SovietandU.S. atmospheric nucleartestexplo-
sions of large weapons in 1952-1962 were calcu-
lated by Foley and Ruderman to result in a
reduction of morethan 10percentintotal ozone.
(See M. H. Foley and M. A. Ruderman, "Strato-
spheric NO from Past Nuclear Explosions",
Journal of Geophysics, Res. 78, 4441-4450.) Yet
observations that they cited showed no reduc-
tions in ozone. Nor did ultraviolet increase.
Other theoreticians calculated sizeable reduc-
tions in total ozone, but interpreted the obser-
vational data to indicate either no reduction, or
much smaller reductions than their calculated
ones.
A realistic simplified estimate of the in-
creased ultraviolet light dangers to American
survivors of a large nuclear war equates these
hazards to moving from San Francisco to sea
level at the equator, where the sea level inci-
denceof skincancers(seldomfatal) ishighest-
about 10 times higher than the incidence at San
Francisco.Manyadditionalthousandsof Ameri-
can survivors might get skin cancer, but little
or no increase in skin cancers might result if in
the post-attack world deliberate sun tanning
and going around hatless went out of fashion.
Furthermore, almost all of today's warheads
are smaller than those exploded in the large-
weapons tests mentioned above; most would
inject much smaller amounts of ozone-destroy-
ing gasses, or no gasses, into the stratosphere,
where ozone deficiencies may persistfor years.
Andnuclearweapons smallerthan500 kilotons
result in increases (due to smog reactions) in
upper tropospheric ozone. In a nuclear war,
these increases would partiallycompensate for
the upper-level tropospheric decreases-as ex-
plained by Julius S. Chang and Donald J.
Wuebbles of Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory.
• Myth: Unsurvivable"nuclearwinter" surely
will follow a nuclear war. The world will be
frozen if only 100 megatons (less than one
percent of all nuclear weapons) are used to
.ignitecities.World-envelopingsmokefromfires
and the dust from surface bursts will prevent
almostall sunlightandsolarheatfrom reaching
the earth's surface. Universal darkness for
weeks! Sub-zerotemperatures,eveninsummer-
time! Frozencrops, eveninthe junglesofSouth
America! Worldwide famine! Whole species of
animals and plants exterminated! The survival
of mankind in doubt!
• Facts: Unsurvivable "nuclear winter" is a
discredited theory that, since its conception in
1982, has been used to frighten additional
millions into believing that trying to survive a
nuclear war is a waste of effort and resources,
and that only by ridding the world of almost all
nuclear weapons do we have a chance of sur-
viving.
Non-propagandizing scientists recently
have calculated that the climatic and other
environmentaleffects of evenanall-outnuclear
war would be much less severe than the catas-
trophiceffectsrepeatedlypublicizedbypopular
astronomer Carl Sagan and his fellow activist
scientists, and by all the involved Soviet scien-
tists. Conclusions reached from these recent,
realistic calculations are summarized in an
article,"NuclearWinterReappraised",featured
in the 1986 summerissueof Foreign Affairs,the
prestigiousquarterlyof the CouncilonForeign
Relations. The authors, Starley L. Thompson
and Stephen H. Schneider, are atmospheric
scientists with the National Center for Atmos-
pheric Research. They showed " . . . that on
scientific grounds the global apocalyptic con-
clusionsof theinitialnuclearwinterhypothesis
can nowberelegatedto a vanishinglowlevel of
probability.