 with an Emergency Exit 273
SELECTED REFERENCES 277
SELECTED INDEX - 279Updated and Expanded 1987 Edition
The purpose of this book is to provide
Americans and other unprepared people with
information and self-help instructions that will
significantly increase their chances of sur-
viving a nuclear attack. It brings togetherfield-
tested instructions that, if followed by a large
fraction of Americans during a crisis that pre-
cedes an attack, could save millions of lives.
The author is convinced that the vulnerability
especially of Americans to nuclear threat or
attack must be reduced and that the wide dis-
semination of the information contained in this
book will help preserve peace with freedom.
Underlying the advocacy of Americans learning
these down-to-earth survival skills is the belief that if
one prepares for the worst. the worst is less likely to
happen. Effective American civil defense preparations
would reduce the probability of nuclear blackmail and
war. Yet in our world of increasing dangers, it is
significant that the United States spends much less per
capita on civil defense than many other countries. The
United States' annual funding is about 50 cents per
capita, and only a few cents of this is spent on
war-related civil defense. Unless U.S. civil de-
fense policies are improved, you are unlikely to
receive from official sources much of the sur-
vival information given in this book.
Over400,000copiesofthe Oak Ridge Nation-
al Laboratory original 1979 edition of Nuclear
War Survival Skills have been sold by various
private publishers. A few additions and modifi-
cations, some helpful and others harmful, were
made in several of these private printings. This
updated and expanded edition is needed because
of changes in nuclear weapons and strategies
between 1979 and 1987, and because of improve-
ments in self-help survival equipment and in-
structions.
The 1987 edition provides current informa-
tion on how the Soviet Union's continuing de-
ployment of smaller, more accurate, more
numerous warheads should affect your shelter-
building and evacuation plans.
In the first chapter the myths and facts about the
consequences of a massive nuclearattack are discussed.
Two post-1979 myths have been added: the myth
of blinding post-attack increased ultra-violet
sunlight. and the myth of unsurvivable "nuclear
winter" - along with refuting facts.
A new chapter, "Permanent Family Fallout
Shelters for Dual Use", has been added, because
the author has received many requests for
instructions for buildingpermanentsmall shel-
ters better and less expensive than those de-
scribed in official civil defense hand-outs.
Another new chapter, "Trans-Pacific Fallout",
tells how to reduce radiation dangers that you
will face if one or more nations use nuclear
weapons, but none are exploded on America.
Improvedinstructions aregivenfor making
and using a KFM, based on the findings of
numerous builders since 1979. (The KFM still is
the only accurate and dependable fallout radia-
tion meter that millions of average people can
make for themselves in a few hours, using only
common household materials - if they have
these improved instructions with patterns.)
Field-tested instructions for easily made Direc-
tional Fans, the simplest means for pumping
air, have been added to the "Ventilation and
Cooling of Shelters" chapter. Also included in
this book are scores of other new facts and
updatings likely to help save lives if nuclear
war strikes.
A new appendix gives instructions for a
homemakeable Plywood Double-Action Piston
Pump, inspired by a wooden air pump the
author saw being used in China in 1982.
This first-of-its-kind book is primarily a
compilation and summary of civil defense
measures developed at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory and elsewhere over the past 24
years, and field tested by typical untrained
Americans in many states, from Florida to
Washington. The reader is urged to make at least
some of these low-cost preparations before a crisis
arises. The main emphasis, however, is on survival
preparations that could be made in the last few days of
a worsening CrISIS.
The author wrote the original, uncopy-
righted Nuclear War Survival Skills while working
as a research engineer at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. As a result, he has no proprietory
rights and has gotten nothing but satisfaction
from past sales. Nor will he gain materially
from future sales, as can be judged by reading
his copyrightnotice coveringthis edition. 