 had some dose of radiation which
might be of long-term concern. There will,
unfortunately, be additional casualties. We hope
the number will be small." The Rocky Mountain
News headlined"100,000SOVIETS TO SUFFER
FROM RADIATION, DOCTOR SAYS". Mary
McGrory, the syndicated liberal columnist, also
misinterpreted Dr. Gaie's risk estimate and
misinformed her readers- by writing: "He [Dr.
Gale] estimatedthatthere couldbe 100,000cases
of radiation sickness ...". Such dramatic news
items givethe impression that 100,000Russians
- not justa small fraction ofthat number - are
likely to suffer sickness or death from the
Chernobylradiation. So additionaltypicalAmer-
icans, reading misinformation of this type and
knowingverylittle about statisticalevaluations
of risks based on probabilities, have had their
worst nuclear fears strengthened.
The public's exaggeratedfears ofextremely
small amounts of. radiation also are worsened
by the media's use withoutexplanations ofvery
small units of radiation measurement, including
the picocurie. (The picocurie is used to express
the radioactive contamination of milk, water,
etc., and is only one millionth of a millionth
[1/1,000,000,000,000] of a curie.) One episode in
which fears of radiation were thus worsened
occurred shortly afterthe invisible fallout cloud
from the Chernobyl disaster first reached the
United States. Some listeners were'frightened
when a radio announcer merely statedthat milk
samples in northwest Oregon showed 118 pico-
curiesperIiterof radioactive iodine. FewAmeri-
cans know that they will not be advised to stop
using fresh milk unless its contamination is
15,000 picocuries ormore perliter- as specified
in the Food and Drug Administration's official.
very cautious "Protective Action Guidance",
published in the Federal Register of October 22,
1982.
The maximum measured radioactive con-
tamination of milk in the United States by
iodine-131 from the Chernobyl disaster was in
milk produced by cows grazing on pasture in
Washington: 560 picocuries per liter. The much
greaterpotentialdangerfrom trans-Pacificwar
fallout isbroughtoutbythefact thatthe approx-
imately 300-kiloton Chinese test explosion of
December 28, 1966 resulted in worse iodine-131
contamination of milk produced by a cow
grazing on pasture near Oak Ridge, Tennessee:
900 picocuries per liter. Even a small overseas
nuclear war with only 20 or so kiloton-range
nuclear explosions could cause high enough
contamination of milk to result in the Govern-
ment'swarningAmericansto refrainfrom using
fresh milk. Most Americans would heed this
warning and would not drink or otherwise use
fresh milk for weeks. In addition, a small over-
seas nuclear war possibly would cause a few
American casualties years to decades later.
TWO SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS
1. Trans-Pacific warfallout depositedon an
Americaat peacesurely would be a disaster, but
not an overwhelming one. The economic and
psychological impact probably would be more
damaging than the losses of health and life.
2. Prudentindividualsshouldmake prepara-
tions to enable them to use the low cost protec-
tive countermeasures described in this book,
especially those in Chapter 13.Some of the most
effective countermeasures, such as getting
enough prophylactic potassium iodide to pre-
ventthyroiddamageevenifwarfallout dangers
from explosions inthe UnitedStatesoroverseas
were to continue for a couple of months, cannot
be accomplished aftereven anoverseasnuclear
war begins.Appendix A
Instructions for Six Expedient Fallout Shelters
SHELTER-BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
The following step-by-step instructions for
building 6 types of earth-eovered expedient shelters
have enabled untrained families to build even the
most difficult of these shelters in lessthan 2days. The
only families who took longer- up to 4 days were
the few who were delayed by very heavy rains. Each
of these shelters has been built by several different
families or groups of families. Only widely available
materials and hand tools are required. They have
been built under simulated crisis conditions in
environments typical of large regions of the United
States: covered-trench types have been built in
forested clay hills of Tennessee. 