an easily be piled on the
surface only I to 5 ft from the edge of the
excavation.
12. Finish the bottom of the excavation so that it
slopes vertically 1/2 in. per foot of length toward
the entrance, and also slopes toward the central
drain ditch. (Later, sticks covered with porous
fabric should be placed in the ditches, to serve
like a crushed-rock drain leading to a sump.)
13. While some persons are excavating, others
should be cutting green poles and hauling them
to the site. Cut poles that have tops no smaller
than the specified diameters for eachtype of pole
(not including the bark).
14. For ease in handling poles, select wall and roof
poles with top diameters no more than 50%
larger than the specified minimum diameters.
15. Sort the poles by sizeand layall poles of the same
size together, near the excavation.
16. Before the excavation IS completed, start
building the ladder-like, horizontal braces of the
shelter frame. Construct these braces on smooth
ground near the excavation. Place two straight
poles. each 10 ft 6 in. long (with small-end
diameters of 4 in.), on smooth ground, parallel
and 6 ft 2 in. apart. Hold these poles securely so
thai their outer sides are exactly 6 ft 2 in. apart,
by driving two pairs of stakes into the ground so
that they just touch the outsides of the two long
poles. Each of the four stakes should be located
about one foot from the end of a pole. To keep
the 10ft 6 in. poles from being rotated duringthe
next step. nail two boards or small poles across
them perpendicularly as temporary braces,
about 4 ft apart.
Then with an ax or hatchet, slightly flatten the
inner sides of the two poles at the spots where the
ends of the 6 cross-brace poles will be nailed.
"'ext. saw each cross-brace pole to the length
required to fit snugly into its place. Finally,
toenail each cross-brace pole in place, preferably
with two 40-penny nails in each end.
17. Place the lower, ladder-like horizontal brace of
the main room on the floor of the completed
excavation.
18. Build the frame of the main room. Near the four
corners of the room, secure four of its wall poles
in their final vertical positions by nailing, wiring,
or tying temporary brace-poles to the inner sides
of these 4 wall poles and to the inner sides of the
two long poles of the ladder-like horizontalbrace
on the bottomof the excavation. To keep the two
pairs of vertical wall poles exactly 6ft. 2in. apart
until the upper ladder-like horizontal brace is
secured in its place, nail a temporary horizontal
brace across each pairof vertical poles, about I ft
below their tops.
19. To support the upper ladder-like horizontal
brace, nail blocks to the inner sides of the four
vertical wall poles, as shown in the lower right-
hand corner of the pictorial view, Fig. A.3.2. If
you have large nails, use a blockabout 3in. thick
and 6 in. long, preferably cut from a green, 4-in.-
diameter pole.
20·. In the finished shelter, DO NOT leave any
vertical support poles under the long poles of the
upper ladder-like horizontal brace; to do so
would seriously reduce the usable space alongthe
walls for benches, bunks, and occupants.
21. While some workersare buildingthe frame of the
main room, other workers should make the four
ladder-like horizontal braces for the two en-
trances, then make the complete entrances. To
keep the ladder-like horizontal braces square
during construction and back-filling, nail a
temporary diagonal brace across each one.
22. When the four wall poles and the two ladder-like
horizontal braces of the main room are in place,
put the remaining vertical wall poles in place,
touching each other, until all walls are com-
pleted. When placing the wall poles, keep them
vertical by alternately putting a butt and a top
end uppermost. Wall poles can be held In
position by backfilling and tamping about a foot
of earth against their lower ends, or they can be
wired in position until backfilled.
23. Besure to use the two 5-in.-diameter poles (6 ft 2
in. 