 production would need
to beonly739 poundsperperson. Our 1985annual
production would have supplied every adult,
child, and infant in a population of 100 million
with 6250 pounds of these four staples..This is
more than 8 times enough to maintain good
nutrition by Chinese standards.
Recovery from a massive nuclear attack would
depend largelyon sufficientfood reservesbeingavailable
to enable survivors to concentrate on restoring the
essentials of mechanized farming. Enough housing
would remain intact or could be built to provide
adequate shelter for the first few crucial years; enough
clothing and fabrics would be available. But ifsurvivors
were forced by hunger to expend their energies at-
tempting primitive subsistence farming, many deaths
from starvation would occur and the prospects for
national recovery would be greatly reduced.
Americans' greatestsurvivalassetattheend
of 1985 was about 17 billion bushels (about 850
billion pounds) of wheat, corn, grain sorghums,
and soybeans in storage, mostly on farms. If200
million Americans were to survive a limited
nuclear attack and if only half of this stored food
reserve could be delivered to the needy, each
survivor would have adequate food for over 3
years, by Chinese nutritional standards.
In view of the crucial importance of large food
reserves to the prospects for individual and national
survival, it is to be hoped that U.S. food surpluses and
large annual carry-overs willcontinue.
A BASIC SURVIVAL RAnON TO STORE
Arationcomposed ofthe basicfoods listedbelowin
Table 9.3 provides about 2600 calories per day and is
nutritionally balanced. It keeps better than a ration of
typical Americanfoods, requires much lessspaceto store
or transport, and ismuch lessexpensive. The authorand
some friends have stored enough of these basic foods to
last their families several months during a crisis, and
have eaten large quantities of these foods with satis-
faction over the past 20 years. (A different emergency
ration should be stored for infants and very small
children, as will be explained in the following section.)
Field tests have indicated thatthe majority of Americans
would find these basic foods acceptable under crisis
conditions. In normal times, however, no one should
store this or any otheremergencyfood supplyuntil after
he has prepared, eaten, and found its components
satisfactory.
Unprocessed grains and beans provide adequate
nourishment for many millions of the world's people
who have littleelseto eat. Dry grains and beans are very
compact: a 5-gallon can holds about 38 pounds of hard
wheat. Yetwhencooked,dry wholegrains become bulky
and givea well-fedfeeling - a distinct advantage ifit is
necessary to go on short rations during a prolonged
cnsis.
This basic ration has two disadvantages: (I) it
requires cooking, and (2) Americans are un-
accustomed to such a diet. Cooking difficulties can
be minimized by having a grain-grinding device, a
Table 9.3. A basic survival ration for multi-year storage
Ounces Grams Pounds Kilograms
per day per day for 30 days for 30days
full ration full ration
Whole-kernel hard wheat 16 454 30.0 13.6
Beans 5 142 9.4 4.3
Non-fat milk powder 2 57 3.8 1.7
Vegetable oil 28 1.9 0.9
Sugar 2 57 3.8 1.7
Salt (iodized) .s.. ---ill- 0.63 ~
Total Weights 26'/) 748 49.5 22.5
Multi-vitamin pills: I pill each daybucket stove with a few pounds of dry wood or
newspapers for fuel, and the know-how to make a
"fireless cooker" by using available insulating ma-
terials such as extra clothing. The disadvantage of
starting to eat unaccustomed foods at a stressful
time can be lessened by eating more whole grains
and beans in normal times-thereby, incidentally,
saving money and improving a typical American
diet by reducing fat and increasing bulk and fiber.
When storing enough of this ration to last for
several months or a year, it is best to select several
kinds of beans for variety and improved nutrition.
If soybeans are included, take into account the dif-
ferences between soybeans and common beans, as
noted earlier in this chapter.
