 the drippingceilingand wetwalls
of a reinforced-concrete, family-sized shelter
that I inspected on an early spring day at the
Civil Defence College in Yorkshire, England.
Suchcondensation also can occur in above-
ground structures. Before World War II I had a
600-year-oldbedroominQueen's College, Oxford
University. My bedroom's outer wall was made
of solid limestone blocks about 15 inches thick,
simply plastered and painted on the inside. On
some spring days moisture condensed on the
inside of the cold outer wall, ran down, and
collected in little puddles on the floor. The
occasional small coal fire in my adjacent study
was barely sufficienttograduallyevaporatethe
water and reduce my bedroom's humidity
enough to prevent mold from forming. This
often-repeated occurrence proves the inade-
quacyofmerelykeepinganelectriclightturned
on for heat to prevent condensation inside an
uninsulated shelter built in a cool, frequently
humid locality.
Condensation and resultant 100 percent
humid air can rust and eat away most steel
pipes. Ventilation pipes should be made of
galvanized steel or other materials that are
undamaged by seasonal condensation and 100
percent humidity. In Connecticut I saw shelter
ventilation pipes made of steel protected with
two coats of marine paint; they were badly
rusted only two years after installation.
Operating it dehumidifier with automatic
controls is the most practical way for most
peopleto preventcondensation andotherdamp-
ness problems in a shelter during peacetime.
Almost all of the Chinese shelters that I in-
spected in six cities are dual-use shelters and
typicallyareequippedwithlargedehumidifiers.
A small dehumidifier adequate for a family
shelter can be bought from a dependable mail
order company, such as Sears, for about $250 in
1987.
To save floor space and facilitate removal
of water, a dehumidifier should be installed
near a shelter's ceiling. Then water from the
dehumidifier can be disposed of most easily
through a pipe or tube providing gravity drain-
age, best to the outdoors, second best to the
sewer. (After a nuclear attack the sewer system
may become clogged and sewage may back up
andflow into a belowground room havingpipes
that normallydischarge intothe sewer, andthat
lackcheckvalves.) Ifthe abovementionedways
of removing water are not possible, a sump and
an automatic sump pump discharging water to
the ground outdoors can solve the peacetime
water disposal problem.
After an attack, electric power can be ex-
pected to fail and shelter humidity will have to
be controlled as much as possiblebyventilation
with outdoor air. A simplewayto learnwhento
ventilate a shelter to dry it was described in a
Russian article on shelter management: Keepseveral small cans of water in the shelter. They
will be at about the same temperature as the
shelter walls when the shelter is closed and is
not being ventilated. If a filled can is exposed to
outdoor air for about 10 minutes and moisture
condenses on it (as a glass filled with an iced
drink "sweats"on a humid summerday), do not
ventilate the shelter. If no moisture condenses
on the can, ventilate.
A WALK-IN ENTRANCE
Only a small fraction of permanent family
shelters without a walk-in entrance have "been
kept in good condition for many years. Per-
manent Iamrly shelters with vertical or crawl-
in entrances are found so inconvenient that the
bigmajority ofowners do notuse them even for
rotatedfood storage. In normal peacetime, most
well informed Americans concerned with pro-
tectingtheirfamiliesconcludethatonlya shelter
skillfullydesigned for dual use justifiesthecost
of building and maintaining it. Significantly,
Chinese civil defense has come to the same
conclusionregardingChinesepermanentpublic
shelters: thosethathave been built, and thatstill
are being built, are almost all useful both in
peacetime and in wartime.
If a family can use its shelter without
having to go outside and be exposed to rain,
snow, cold, or night problems, its dual use
shelter will be a more valuable peacetime asset
than a shelter not directly connected to the
house. 