ened by eating more whole grains
and beans in normal times-thereby, incidentally,
saving money and improving a typical American
diet by reducing fat and increasing bulk and fiber.
When storing enough of this ration to last for
several months or a year, it is best to select several
kinds of beans for variety and improved nutrition.
If soybeans are included, take into account the dif-
ferences between soybeans and common beans, as
noted earlier in this chapter.
In many areas it is difficult to buy wheat and
beans at prices nearly as low as the farmer receives
for these commodities. However, in an increasing
number of communities, at least one store sells
whole-grain wheat and beans in large sacks at
reasonable prices. Mormons, who store food for a
range of possible personal and national disasters, are
often the best sources of information about where
to get basic foods in quantity, at reasonable cost.
Soon after purchase, bulk foods should be removed
from sacks (but not necessarily from sealed-plastic
liner-bags) and sealed in metal containers or in
thick-walled plastic containersfor storage. Especially
in the more humid parts of the United States, grain
and beans should befrequently checked for moisture.
If necessary, these foods should be dried out and
rid of insects as described later in this chapter.
Vegetable oil stores as well in plastic bottles as
in glass ones. The toughness and lightness of plastic
bottles make them better than glass for carrying
when evacuating or for using in a shelter. Since a
pound ofoil provides about 21/4times as muchenergy
as does a pound of sugar, dry grain, or milk powder,
storing additional vegetable oil is an efficient way
to improve a grain diet and make it more like the
40o/c-fat diet of typical Americans.
All multivitamin pills providing 5000 Inter-
national Units (1500 mg retinol equivalent) vitamin
A, 400 IV (10 mg) of vitamin 0, and 50 to 100 mg
of vitamin C, must meet U.S. Governmentstandards,
so the least expensive usually are quite adequate.
Storage in a refrigerator greatly lengthens the time
before vitamin pills must be replaced with fresh
ones. Because vitamin C is so essential, yet very
inexpensive and long-lasting, it is prudent to store
a large bottle.
It would be wise to have on hand ready-to-eat,
compact foods for use during a week or two in a
shelter, in addition to those normally kept in the
kitchen. It is not necessary to buy expensive"survival
foods" or the special dehydrated foods carried by
many backpackers. All large food stores sell the
following concentrated foods: non-fat milk powder,
canned peanuts, compact ready-to-eat dry cereals
such as Grape Nuts, canned meat and fish, white
sugar, vegetable oil in plastic bottles, iodized salt,
and daily multivitamin pills. If shelter occupants
have a way to boil water(seeFigs. 9.2 and 9.3, Bucket
Stove), it isadvisable to include rice, noodles, and an
"instant" cooked cereal such as oatmeal or
wheat-along with coffee and tea for those who
habitually drink these beverages.
Parched grain is a ready-to-eat food that has
been used for thousands of years. Whole-kernel
wheat, corn, and rice can be parched by the following
method: Place the kernels about 1/4-inch deep in a
pan, a skillet, or a tin can while shaking it over a
flame, hot coals, or a' red hot electric burner. The
kernels will puff and brown slightly when parched.
These parchedgrainsare notdifficult to chewand can
be pounded to a meal more easily than can the raw
kernels. Parched grain-stores well ifkept dry and free
of insects.
EMERGENCY FOOD FOR BABIES
Infants and very small children would be the
first victims of starvation after a heavy nuclear
attack, unless special preparations are made on their
behalf. Our huge stocks of unprocessed foods, which
could prevent the majority of unprepared survivors
from dying of hunger, would not be suitable for the
very young. They need foods that are more con-
centrated and less rough. Most American mothers do
not nurse their infants, and if a family's supply of
baby foods were exhausted the parents might ex-
perience the agony of seeing their baby slowly
starve.
Few Americans have watched babies starving.
