 THE CENTERS OF THE TWO ENDS, SMOOTHLY CUT TABS
OUT OF THE SIDES - AS INDICATED BY SKETCH OF ONE END,
ON RIGHT.
3. MARK AN "X" ON EACH TAB, AS SHOWN.
4. SELECT 6 PEBBLES OR LUMPS OF EARTH EACH ABOUT:t4 INCH
IN DIAMETER.
Fig. A. A dependable canopy to keep fallout and rain out of a vertical entry.Appendix A.I
Door-Covered Trench Shelter
(See illustration at the end of Appendix A.I)
PROTECTION PROVIDED
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor250
(PF 250)-a person in the open outside this shelter
would receive 250 times as much fallout radiation as .
he would if inside.
Against blast: Better protection than most
homes, if built in very stable earth. Blast tests have
indicated that this shelter would beundamaged up to
at least the 5-psi overpressure range from large
explosions. Without blast doors, the shelter's
occupants could be injured at this overpressure
range, although probably not fatally.
Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant from
fires producing carbon monoxide and toxic smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In a location where atleastone hollow-core
door per occupant is available, and where the
earth is very stable and a dry hole or trench 41/2
feet deep can be dug without difficulty. (A
family evacuating in a pickup truck or large
station wagon can carry enough doors, with
doorknobs removed. Strong boards at least 6
feet long and at least one full inch thick, or
plywood at least 3/4-inch thick, also can be used
to roof this 36-inch-wide trench and to support
its overhead earth shielding.)
Warning: Somedoors with single-thickness
panels if loaded with earth will break before
they bend enough to result in protective earth
arching.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
Fora typical family orothergroup withtwo
or more members able to work hard for most of
36 hours. (Stronger-than-average families with
most members able to work hard have com-
pleted this type of shelter is less than 24 hours
after receiving step-by-step, well illustrated
instructions.)
CAPACITY
The shelterillustrated isroofed with 3doorsand is
the minimum length for 3 persons. (If you have
additional doors, or boards and sticks at least 3ft long,
make the entryway trenches 3 or 4 ft longer than
illustrated-if not pressed for time.)
For each additional person, add an additional
door. (If more thanabout 7personsare to besheltered,
build two or more separate shelters.)
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
I. Before beginning work, study the drawings and
read ALL of the following instructions.
2. Divide the work; CHECK OFF EACH STEP
WHEN COMPLETED.
3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed (I) a ventilating pump (a KAP 16 in.
wide and 28 in. high), essential for this shelter
except in cool weather, and (2) the storage of at
least 15gallons ofwater per occupant(seeAppendix
Band Chapter 8).
4. Start to assemble materialsand tools that are listed
for the illustrated 3-person shelter.
A. Essential Materials and Tools for a 3-Person
Shelter
• Three hollow-core doors.
• A shovel (and a pick, ifthe earth isvery
hard).
• Two to three square yards per person of
waterproof materials for rainproofing the
roof. Use materials such as 4-mil polyeth-
ylene film, shower curtains, plastic table-
cloths, plastic mattress covers, or canvas.
• Two pieces of plastic or tightly woven
cloth (each about 61/2 X 61/2 ft) to make
canopies over the two shelter openings. Also
sticks and cords or strips of cloth to supportthe canopies-as described in Fig. A of the
introductory section of this appendix.
• Materials and tools for buildingasimple
shelter-ventilating pump, a KAP 16 in. wide
and 28 in. high. (See Appendix B.) Only in
cold or continuously breezy, cool weather
can tolerable temperaturesand humidities be
maintained in a crowded underground
shelter without an air pump.
• Containers for storing adequate water.
(See Chapter 8.)
B. 