fact that the dangers from fallout radiation- bestexpressed interms ofthe radiation
dose rate, roentgens per hour (RI hr) -- quite rapidly decrease during the first few
days, and then decrease more and more slowly, makes it very important to have a
fallout metercapable ofaccurately measuring the unseen, unfeltand changing fallout
dangers. Occupants ofafallout shelter should beable to minimizethe radiationdoses
they receive. In order to effectively minimize the radiation doses, a dependable
measuring instrument isneeded to determine the doses they receivewhilethey are in
the shelter and while they are outside for emergency tasks, such as going out to get
badly needed water. Also, such an instrument would permit them to determine when
it is safe to leavethe shelter for good.
Untrainedfamilies,guided only bythese written instructionsand using onlylowcost
materials and tools found inmost homes, have beenable to make a KFM byworking
3 or 4 hours. Bystudying the operating sections of these instructions for about IV2
hours, average untrained familieshave beenable to successfullyusethisfallout meter
to measure dose rates and to calculate radiation doses received, permissible times of
exposure, etc.
The KFM (Kearny Fallout Meter) was developed at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. It is understandable, easily repairable, and as accurate as most civil
defense fallout meters. In the United States in 1986 the least expensive
commercially available dose-rate meter that is accurate and dependable
and that measures high enough dose rates for wartime use is a British
instrumentthatretailsfor $375. ComparableAmericaninstruments retail
for over $1000.
Beforea nuclear attack occurs is the best time to build, test and learn how to use a
KFM. However, this instrument isso simple that itcould be made evenafter fallout
arrives provided that all the materials and tools needed (seelistsgivenin Sections V,
VI, and VII) and a copy of these instructions have been carried into the shelter.
II. Survival WorkPriorities During a Crisis
Before building a KFM, persons expecting a nuclear attack within a few hO,urs or
days and already inthe placewhere they intend to await attack should work with the
following priorities: (I) build or improve a high-protection-factorshelter (ifpossible,
ashelter covered with 2or 3feetofearthand separatefrom flammable buildings). At
the same time, make and install a KAP (a homemade shelter-ventilating pump) - if
instructions and materials are available. If not available, at least make a
DirectionalFan. Alsostore at least 15gallons ofwater for each shelter occupant-
ifcontainersare available. (2)Assembleall materials for one or two KFM s.(3)Make
and store the drying agent (byheating wallboard gypsum, as later described)for both
the KFM and its dry-bucket. (4) Complete at least one KFM.
III.Howto UseThese instructions to Best Advantage
I. Read ALOUD all of these instructions through Section VB, "Tools Needed,"
before doing anything else.
2. Next assemble all of the needed materials and tools.
3. Then read ALOUD ALL of each section following Section VIIbefore beginning
to make the part described in that section.
A FAMILY THAT FAILSTO READALOUD ALL OF EACH
SECTIONDESCRIBING HOW TO MAKEA PART. BEFORE
BEGINNING TO MAKE THAT PART. WILL MAKE AVOID-
ABLEMISTAKESANDWILL WASTETIME.
4. Have different workers. or pairs of workers. make the parts they are best
qualified to make. For example. a less skilled worker should start making the
drying agent (as described in Section VIII)before other workers start making
other parts. The most skilled worker should make and install the
aluminum-foil leaves (Sections Xand XI).
S. Give workers the sections of the instructions covering the parts they are to
build--so they can follow the step-by-step instructions. checking off with a
pencil each step as it is completed.
6. Discuss the problems that arise. The head of the family often can give better
answers if he first discusses the different possible interpretations of some
instructions with other family members, especiallyteenagers.
7, After completing one KFM and learning to use it. if time permits make a
second KFM--that should be a better instrument.
z
~:::0
c::
9ozen
~
~
N
tv
-",.0)
a..IV. 