 and sew this plastic over the
outside of the eye holes, stitching the plastic
around its edges and down the centerline.
6. Fold the three pieces along their vertical center-
line and stitch the lower side together, along the
upper stitch line Y_to_yI . Stitch 1/2 inch from the
lower edge. Then sew a second row of stitches.
7. Sew on the elastic head bands, making them short
enough to hold the mask tightly around yourface.
If the ela~tic is from the waistband of a man's
undershorts, use a doubled elastic both over the
top of your head and around the back of your
head, Make these elastic pieces so short that you
can just put all your fingers comfortably between
the elastic and your head when the pieces are fully
stretched. If using a weaker elastic, be sure to
adjust the lengths to a tight fit, to preventairleaks
under the edges of the mask. Because of the
thickness of material where the elastics are
connected to the uppercorners of the mask, it may
be necessary to do this stitching by hand.
8. To keep fallout particles off your head and neck,
sew a loose-fitting piece of bedsheet cloth (not
illustrated) to the edges ofthe mask that fit around
your face. This cloth should extend back over
your head and down over your collar, over which
it can be tied.
Use:
Put on the mask by first placing it over your
chin, then pulling the back elastic down to fit around
the back of your head.
CAUTION:
To avoid spreading infections, each mask should
be labeled and worn by only one person.Chapter 16
Minimum Pre-Crisis Preparations
Your chances of surviving a nuclear attack will
be improved if you make the following low-cost
preparations beforea serious crisis arises. Once many
Americans become convinced that a nuclearattack is
a near certainty, they will rush to stores and buy all
available survival supplies. If you wait to prepare
until a crisis does arise, you are likely to beamong the
majority who will have to make-do with inadequate
supplies of water containers, food, and materials.
Furthermore, even if you have the necessary
materials and instructions to make the most needed
survival items, you and your family are not likely to
have time to make all of them during a few days of
tense crisis.
The following recommendations .are intended
primarily for the majority who live in areas likely to
be subjected to blast, fire, or extremely heavy fallout.
These people should plan to evacuate to a safer area.
(Many citizens living outside high-risk areas,
.especially homeowners with yards, can and should
make better pre-crisis preparations. These would
include building high-protection-factor permanent
shelters covered with earth.)
SHELTER
Keep on hand the tools and materials your
family or group will need to build or improve a high-
protection-factor expedient shelter: One or more
shovels, a pick (if in a hard-soilarea), a bow-sawwith
an extra blade, a hammer, and 4-mil polyethylene
film for rainproofingyour planned shelter. Also store
the necessary nails, wire, etc. needed for the kind of
shelter you plan to build.
Keep instructions for shelter-building and other
survival essentials in a safe and convenient place.
VENTILATION-COOLING
Make a homemade shelter-ventilating pump, a
KAP, of the size required for the shelter you plan to
build or use.
WATER
Keep on hand water containers (including at
least four 30-gallon untreated polyethylene trash
bags and two sacks or pillowcases for each person), a
pliable garden hose or othertubefor siphoning, and a
plastic bottle ofsodium hypochlorite bleach (such as
Clorox) for disinfecting water and utensils.
FALLOUT METER
Make one or two KFMs and learn how to use
this simple instrument.
FOOD
Store at least a 2-week supply of compact, non-
perishable food. The balanced ration of basic dry
foods described in Chapter 9, Food, satisfies
requirements for adults and larger children at
minimum cost. If your family includes babies or
small children, be sure to store more milk powder,
vegetable oil, and sugar.
Continuing to breast-feed babies bornduringan
impending crisis would greatly simplify their care
should the crisis develop and worsen.
