ridor that has the second truck-sized portal at its outer end.
A pair of pre-mechanization coal miners produced a directed airflow by
holding a piece of canvas vertically between them while they quickly walked
a short ways in the direction ofthe desired airflow; they walked back with the
canvas held horizontally between them. Then they repeated.
1. No installation is needed, thus saving working time and materials for
making habitable shelters hurriedly built or upgraded during a crisis.
2. Directional Fans enable shelter occupants to quickly reverse the
direction of air flow through their shelter when outdoor wind changes cause
the direction of natural air flow to be reversed.
3. Four or more Directional Fans when used to circulate air within a
shelterroom can serve like air ducts, while simultaneously fanning occupants.
4. Directional Fans are very unlikely to be damaged by blast effects
severe enough to wreck bladed fans or other fixed ventilation devices placed
at or near air-intake or air-exhaust openings, but not severe enough to injure
shelter occupants.
C. ADDITIONAL ADVANTAGES OF DIRECTIONAL FANS
CHANGE HAND
POSITIONS
WHILE MOVING FAN
HORIZONTALLY BACK
TO STARTING
POSITION
The practicality of using Bedsheet Fans to ventilate some very large
mines or caves having 2 or more large openings was proved by tests with
members of the Citizens Preparedness Group of GreaterKansas City. These
tests were conducted in 1982 nearKansas CIty in a huge limestone mine that
has a ceiling averaging about 17 feet high, corridors about 35 feet wide,
columns of unexcavated rock about 15 feet square, and over 1,000,000
square feet of level, dry floor space. The airinside is"dead", remarkably still,
because the only openings are two truck-sized portals on one side of the
mine. Five pairs of Bedsheet Fanners, spaced about 75 feet apart down a
corridor, after fanning for several minutes produced a measured air flow of
approximately 100.000 cubic feet per minute through this part of this
corridor!
2. With a Bedsheet Fan
l.'se a 2-man Bedsheet Fan to force thousands of cubic feet per minute of
outdoor air through a tunnel or long corridor having at least a 9-foot ceiling
and a large opening at each end. The most practical design tested was made
from a strong double bedsheet cut down to 6-foot width, with the wide hem at
its head-end left unchanged and with a similar-sized hem sewn in its opposite
end. to give a finished lengthof6 feet. A6-foot-Iong, nominal 1x2-inch board
(or an approximately 11;, inch diameter stick) was secured inside each end
hem of various models with waterproof construction adhesive, or with tacks,
or bv tying. Before a board was inserted, its edges were rounded. Round
sticks were smoothed.
Two persons preparing to use a Bedsheet Fan (see sketch) should stand
facing each other. at right angles to the desired direction of air flow, with the
cloth extended horizontally between them. Each fanner should grip his stick
with one hand near its "downwind" end and with his other hand near its
center.
A pairof Directional Fanners get ready to make a power stroke by leaning
in the upwind direction. as illustrated. Then the pair of fanners should count
1, 2. 3 while they:
IT] Make the power stroke by rapidly sweeping their sticks and the
attached cloth in an arc. until they are leaning in the downwind direction and
the sticks and cloth are again horizontal. See sketch.
OJ, W Hold the sticks and cloth horizontal (to permit air that was
"sucked" behind the cloth to continue flowing in the desired direction) while
leisurely moving the Bedsheet Fan back to the starting position. During this
move the fanners change hands, as illustrated. (Note that what was the upper
side of the fan at the beginning of the power stroke now has become the lower
side. I
Two men thus fanning vigorously produced a net air flow of 5,500 cubic
feet per minute through an empty school corridor that is 8 feet wide, has a 9-
foot ceiling. and is 194 feet long. The doors at both ends were open. To
adequately ventilate and cool people crowded into a long tunnel in hot
weather. a pair of Bedsheet Fanners should be positioned about every 100
feet along its length.
