 made to serve quitewell.The
best sandal designs for hard work and serious
walking have a strap around the heel and in front of
the ankle, with no thong between the toes (Fig. 15.8).
Fig. 15.8. A Ho Chi Minh Sandal, excellent
Vietnamese expedient footwear. Rubber bands cut
from an inner tube have been inserted into a sole of
auto-tire tread.X' _r----------.,.------,,....---_..X
NOTE: DIMENSIONS ARE IN INCHES
Fig. 15.9. A Russian-type homemade fallout
mask. For most Americans this will continue to be a
low-priorityitem as long as Russian warheadsare large.
YT
2
t
(CLOTH
COVERING
HEAD AND
NECK IS
NOT
SHOWN)
x
ELASTIC
POINTS Y AND
-r,DIRECTLY
ABOVE ADAM'S
APPLE
DOUBLE STITCH LINE
0:0 11/4
1 3/4~~'h~3/4o I 1/2
!::,
til
a:1
~IwY'
Making a homemade dustandfallout mask
is still not a high priority survival project. In
normal times, it is better to buy and store good
masks and goggles. The following instruc-
tions for making a homemade mask are an
improved design based on a Russian design
(Fig. 15.9). This mask is the best of several
ORNL-DWG 78-11921
dust and sand that is being blown into a shelter, then
persons in windy areas who occupy small below-ground
expedient shelters should cover their noses and mouths
with several thicknesses of towels or other cloth. Those
who have dust masks should wear them, especially when
working outside in dry, windy weather soon after fallout
deposition. Other than whole-body exposure to
gamma rays, the main danger to well informed
people would be from possible beta burns caused
by fresh, "hot" fallout particles that would collect
in nasal passageways, andfrom swallowedfallout
particles. (Muchofthe materialcontinuallyelimi-
nated from the nose and throat is swallowed.) In
somefallout "hotspots" a secondarydangerwould
be breathing extremely small, "hot" fallout parti-
cles into one'slungs, aftera rain-outoftinyfallout
particles from fallout clouds produced by today's
typical kiloton-range Soviet warheads. In some
areas "hot" particles would be dried and blown
aboutbythe winds within hoursoftheirdeposition
in rain showers.
3 THICKNESSES
OF TERRYCLOTH
TOWELING -J
TOP OF
EYE
SOCKET ..
5 1/2 X 2 1/4 -in.
PIECE OF CLEAR
PLASTIC STITCHED
ON TOP OF BOTH
EYE HOLES
Ifa person has fallout particles on clothingthat he
must continue to wear, he should vigorously brush his
outerclothing beforeenteringa shelterroom. Iffallout
particles are washed off, rinsed off, or otherwise
removed from the skin within a few minutes, no beta
burns will result.
A few days after a nuclear explosion, fallout
particles are not radioactive enough· to cause beta
burns. In areas of heavy fallout, the danger from
external doses ofgamma radiation from fallout on the
ground will continue much longer than will the risk of
beta burns from some of these same fallout particles.
The gamma rays given off by fallout particles
brought into a shelter on clothing or bodies would
subject shelteroccupants to gammadosesso small as to
be ofno significance by wartime standards. Nor would
shelter occupants be endangered by radiation from the
body of a person who, before reaching shelter, had
received a gamma dose large enough to kill him many
times over. Except in science fiction stories, the body of
such a person does not become "radioactive."
FALLOUT MASKS
For the majority of Americans in most fallout
areas, means for filtering fallout particles out of
theairthey breathewould notbe essential survival
equipment.IS Most fallout particles tiny enough to
enterone's lungs would fall to earth so slowlythat
they would reach ground thousandsof miles away
from the explosions. By then, radioactive decay
would make them much less dangerous, and their
depositionwouldbespreadoutovermuchoftheearth.
In pastyearsAmerican-endangeringSovietwar-
heads typically were between20 andone megaton.
