
time radioactive decay would have made them
much lessdangerous. Breathingtiny radioactive
particles into one's lungs would constitute a
minor health hazard compared to otherdangers
that would afflict an unprepared people sub-
jected to a large scale nuclear attack.
SCAVENGING OF RADIOACTIVE
PARTICLES
Scavenging is most effective below about
30,000 feet, the maximum height of most rain
and snow clouds. See Fig. 6.4. Because the
Soviets have deployed thousands of ICBMs
with warheads of "only" 100 to 550 kilotons,
Americans face increased dangers from very
radioactive particles scavenged by rain-outs or
snow-outs. The resultant "hot spots" of fallout
heavy enough to kill unsheltered people in a
few weeks could be scattered even hundreds of
miles downwind from areas of multiple explo-
sions, especially missile fields. PrudentAmeri-
cans, even those living several hundred miles
from important targets, whenever practical
should equiptheir shelters with adequate venti-
lating pumps and dust filters.
This potential dangerfrom extremely small
fallout particles will be worsened if the United
States deploys mobile ICBMs such as Midget-
man, probablyon large military reservations in
the West. (The Soviet Union already has mobile
ICBMs in its nuclear forces.) In the event of a
Sovietattack, ourhard-to-targetmobile missiles
probably would be subjected to a barrage of
relatively small warheads air-bursted so as to
blanket their deployment areas. The resultant
large clouds of extremely small radioactive
particles in the troposphere usually would be
blown eastward, and resultantlife-endangering
"hot spots" from rain-outs and/or snow-outs
could be scattered clear to the Atlantic coast.
Fortunately, even in many expedient shel-
ters completed in a few days, filtered air can be
provided by using a homemade KAP to pump
airthrough furnace or air-conditionerfilters, as
described in the last section of Appendix B. To
learn how you can supply a shelter at low cost
with air so well filtered that essentially all
extremely small fallout particles and infective
aerosols are removed, see Appendix E, How To
Make a Homemade Plywood Double-Action
Piston Pump and Filter.These worsening potential dangers from
extremely small "hot" fallout particles brought
promptly to earth by scavenging are not likely
to endanger nearly as many Americans' lives
as would24-hourfalloutof much largerparticles
from surface and near-surface explosions. Pro-
viding enough outdoor air to shelters, rather
than filtered air. will continue to deserve first
priority.
STOPPING OR RESTRICTING
SHELTER VENTILATION
When instrument readings or observations
show that heavy fallout has begun to be de-
posited,shelteroccupantsshoulddecide whether
to restrict or stop ventilation. If it is windy
outside, even some sand-like fallout particles
may be blown into a shelter with large ventila-
tion openings. However, ventilation should not
be restricted long enough to cause weaker oc-
cupants to be on the verge of collapse from
overheating, or to result in headaches from
exhaled carbon dioxide.
If a house is burning dangerously close to a
separate, earth-covered shelter, closing the shelter's
ventilation openings for an hour or two usually will
prevent the entry of dangerous concentrations of
carbon monoxide. carbon dioxide, or smoke. (Most
houses willburn to the ground in lessthan two hours.)
When an attack isexpected. a shelter, occupied
or soon to be occupied, should be kept as cool as
practical by pumping large volumes of outdoor
air through it when the outdoor air is cooler
than the shelter air. This also willassure that the air
is fresh and low in exhaled carbon dioxide. Then, if a
.need arises to stop or restrict ventilation, the sheltercan
beclosed for longer than could bedone safelyotherwise.
VENTILATION/COOLING OF
PERMANENT SHELTERS
A permanent family fallout shelter, built at
moderate cost before a crisis. should have a
ventilation system that can supply adequate
volumes of either filtered or unfiltered air.
pumped in through an air-intake pipe and out
through an air-exhaust pipe. Provision also
should be made for the grim possibility that
fallout could be so heavy that a shelter might
have to be occupied for weeks, orevenpart-time
for months. 