 concern will be much larger than the
extremely small particles (l to 5 microns in diameter) which are not
completely removed'bythisfilter. Falloutparticlesthissmall produced
by large nuclear explosions do not fall to the ground for many days to
months after the nuclear explosions, by which time they have become
much less radioactive. Essentially all of the larger particles can be
removed merely by filtering the air through a few thicknesses of bath
towel cloth.Appendix F
Means for Providing Improved Natural Ventilation and
Daylight to a Shelter with an Emergency Exit
THE NEED
Survivors in areas of heavy fallout can
greatly reduce the radiationdoses thatthey will
receive, and thus decrease their risks of con-
tractingcancer, ifthey sleep and spend manyof
their non-outdoor-working hours inside good
sheltersduringthefirst severalmonths afteran
attack. (See Minimizing Excess Radiogenic Cancer
Deaths After a Nuclear Attack, by Kathy S. Gant
and Conrad V. Chester, Health Physics, Sep-
tember 1981.)
A permanentfamily sheltercan serve quite
well for months as a post-attack temporary
home if it is designed to provide adequate
natural ventilation most of the time, to have
adequate and easy forced ventilation by a KAP
when forced ventilation is needed, and to have
daylight illumination. A shelter dependent on
ventilation laboriously pumped through pipes
and on artificial lights even during daytime is
much less practical for use as a post-attack
home.
The following instructions should enable a
family having an earth-covered shelter with an
emergency exit to make it much more livable
for months-long occupancy. The means de-
scribed below for providing improved ventila-
tion and daylight illumination also will supply
guidance to survivors who will build shelters
post-attack to minimize continuing radiation
exposures, especially to children and pregnant
women.
BUILDING AND USING A MULTI-PURPOSE
EMERGENCY EXIT HOUSING
Build a multi-use emergency exit housing
of the design pictured in Fig. F.l and detailed in
Fig. F.2. Size your exit housing to fit snugly
over the top of your completed vertical exit
shaft. This exit housing is made of 3/4-inch
exterior plywood, four 2 x 2 x 36-inch boards,
and four 16 x 16-inch window panes of 1/8-inch
Plexiglas. Plated screws and waterproof ad-
hesives are used to assure sturdiness and
durability.
Fig.F.1. Multi-UseEmergencyExitHousing
Installed Over the Square Emergency Exit
Described by Figs. 17.1, 17.2, and 17.3.
The adjustable top of this exit housing
measures 4x 4 x 1feet, andcan be tiltedto make
different sized ventilation openings in any of
four directions. The top also can be raised
straight up to make various sized openings all
the wayaround, oritQan becompletelyclosed -
as explained by Fig. F.2 and the following
descriptions of its uses.11
i
48"
Fig. F.3. The Top and Four Walls of the
Multi-PurposeEmergencyExitHousing, Nested
Together to Save Storage Space.
Fig. FA. Viewfrom BelowtheExit, Looking
UptheMulti-PurposeEmergencyExitHousing.
The top is shown supported in a tilted position
by two 6-inch-wide boards placed between a
wall and the top.
The illustrated housing over a vertical exit
provides:
* A means to regulate shelter ventilation,
and to increase natural ventilation when the
wind is blowing. If, for example, the shelter's
opened exit is to the north of its opened entry
and a northwindisblowing, shelterairflowwill
blow in through the exit and out through the
entry. This natural ventilating airflow, often
inadequate, is increased ifthe adjustable top of
the exithousingisnot simplyraised6 inches on
all four sides, but is tilted as shown in Fig. F.l,
with its south side closed and its north side
tilted up 6 inches to provide a 6 x 26-inch
ventilation opening between the upper edge of
the entry housing's north wall and its top. Then
a north wind striking the north wall produces
'",- ~
48"
3/4:J~i 36" ~U/4"In 34 1/2" ~I I~
MOUNDED OVER
SHELTER
N
Ii- r'-·- Ir--- - - - - ---.