 wall poles. Study Fig. A.5. Place the
two 14-ft poles 20 in. apart, parallel, and equally
distant from the centerline of the ridgepole. Nail
four 20-in.-Iong spacer-poles between each pair
of 14-ft poles, as illustrated. To make sure that
the upperends do not move beforeearth pressure
holds them in place, tie the upperends of the 14-ft
poles together. Drive a stake against the lower
end of each 14-ft pole, to keep it from slipping
outward. Under the center of each 14-ft pole,
place two supporting, vertical posts.
26. Dig. 4-in.-deep trenches for the lower ends of the
sloping end-wall poles of the main room. These
poles must be cut to length so that their upper
ends will be about 4 in. above the outermost 9-ft
roof pole against which they lean. Dig narrow,
vertical trenches, about 8 in. deep, for all vertical
wall poles that do not press against horizontal
brace poles near the ground.
27. Start· placing the sloping end-wall poles. First
place the longest pole, thenthe shorterpoles-all
touching.
28. Across the open spaces between the 9-ft roof
poles, place limbs andz or sticks roughly hori-
zontally, as shown in the lower left-hand
drawing. Be sure to use limbs or sticks that have
diameters of at least 1/2 in. and put them no
farther apart than 6 in. Leave needles and leaves
on the limbs. Do not leave sharp ends sticking
upward. Do not place more than a 6-in.-thick
mass of limbs and leaves over the side-poles. The
thickness of the earth cover necessary for
excellent fallout protection might be uninten-
tionally reduced by making the limb cover too
thick.
29. Place bedsheets (or 4-mil-thick polyethylenefilm
or equally sturdy material) over the limbs and
sticks to keep earth from falling through the roof.
30. To prevent sand or dry earth from falling
between the cracks where the poles are side by
side, cover these parts of the roof with cloth,
plastic, or paper. If these materials are notavailable, use sticks, leaves, and grass. (In tick or
chigger season, avoid using grass. or leaves from
on or near the ground.)
31. After the entryways are completed, begin to
cover the shelter with earth. Starting from the
ground up, put on a full l-ft thickness of earth
cover. First raise its height about a foot on one
side or end of the shelter, and then on the
other-repeatedly. This is to prevent unequal
loading from tipping the shelter or pushing it
over. (Do not excavate any earth closer than 3ft
to the line of stakes marking the final outer edge
of the completed, 2-ft-thick earth cover.)
32. Fill the spaces between the entryways and the
main room only with earth. (An equal thickness
of wood or other light material provides much
less protection against radiation.)
33. Before placing the rainproofing material for the
"buried roof," smooth the surface of the i-n-
thick earth cover. This will prevent sharp rocks
or sticks from puncturing the plastic or other
rainproofing material. If you do not have
sufficient waterproofing materials to cover the
whole roof, use what isavailable to rainproofthe
central part, on both sides of the ridgepole.
34. To prevent rainwateron the ground outsidefrom
running into the entryways, make mounds of
packed earth about 4 inches high across the
entryway floors, about 2ft from theirouterends.
Dig a shallow drainage ditch completely around
the earth mounded over the shelter.
35. Unless the weather is cold, install your shelter-
ventilating KAP in the entry into which you can
feel air moving naturally. (If short of time or
materials, make a small Directional Fan.)
36. Complete the storage of water and other
essentials.
37. To prevent fallout or rain from falling onto the
floor of the outer entryways, place a small
awning (not illustrated) over each opening.
38. Fill all available water containers, including pits
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then
roofed with available materials. If possible,
disinfect all waterstored inexpedient containers,
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach,
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water.
