 that the pole or log is smooth
and will require no additional smoothing
ORNL-DWG 78-16210
when you get ready to move it, or to use itfor
building your shelter. Make and use a
measuring stick to speed up measuring and
cutting poles and logs to the right lengths.
(5) It usually is best first to cut the poles exactly
two or threetimes the final length of the poles
to be used in the shelter.
(6) When you are ready to move the poles to the
shelter site, drag them rather than trying to
carry them on your shoulders. Shouldering
them is more tiring, and you could injure
yourself severely if you should trip.
To drag a log or several poles by hand: (a) Cut a
stick 2 to i/2 in. in diameter and about 3113 ft long; (b)
Tie a short piece of 1/4-in. (or stronger) rope to the
center of the stick; (c) Make a lasso-like loop at the
free end of the rope, so that when it is looped around
the log and two people are pulling (see illustration),
the front end of the log is raised about 6 in. abovethe
ground. The loop should be tightened around the log
about 2 ft. from its end, so that the end of the log
cannot hit the backs of the legs of the two people
pulling it.
ORNL-DWG 78-16211
2 TO 2-1/2 IN.
DIAMETER STICK
40 IN. LONG
CAUTION: If you drag a log down a steep hill, one
person should tie a rope to the rearend of the log, and
then follow the dragger, ready to act as the brake if
needed.
LIMB CUT OFF, TO HOOK OVER THE SQUARE·CUT END OF THE POLE.
~...~_-----DESIRED POLE LENGTH
l
(7) When you get the poles or logs to the location
where you will build the shelter, cut them to
the desired minimumdiameters and specified
lengths, and put all those of one specifiedtype together. Besure that thediameterofthe
smallend ofeach poleofone type isat least as
large as the minimum diameter specified for
its type. Make and use a measuring stick, as
previously described.
14. Use snow for shielding materialfor aboveground
shelters if the earth is so deep-frozen thatdigging
is impractical. For a Ridge-Pole Shelter (see
Appendix A.5), cover the entire shelter with 5 ft
of wetted or well-packed snow. For a Crib-
Walled Shelter (see Appendix A.6), fill the cribs
and then cover and surround the entire shelter
with snow at least 5 ft thick. With wetted orwell-
packed snow 5 ft thick, the protection factor is
about 50. Families have completed these winter
shelters within 2 days.
Several hundred pounds of snow can be
moved at a time by sledding it on a piece of
canvas or other strong material 6 to 8 ft wide.
Attach a stick across one end ofthe material and
tie a rope to the ends ofthe stick, so as to form a
"Y" bridle on which a person can pull.
To keep the occupants of a snow-covered
expedient shelter dry and tolerably warm in sub-
freezing weather, provide sufficient ventilation
openings to maintain inside temperatures at a
few degrees below freezing. (See Chapter 14,
Expedient Clothing.)
15. Make a reliable canopy over the shelterentry. By
following the instructions given in Fig. A on the
following page, you can make a dependable
canopy that ordinary winds will neither tear nor
blow down and that will not catch
rainwater-even if you have no waterproof
material stronger than 4-mil polyethylene film.
16. Take to your shelter enough window screen or
mosquito netting to cover its openings. Except in
freezing-cold weather, flies and mosquitoes
would soon become a problem in most localities
soon after an attack.
17. Work to complete (1) an expedient ventilating-
cooling pump (a KAP) and (2) the storage of at
least 15 gallons of water per person. This work
should be accomplished by the time your shelter
is completed. 