 an attack before exposing the baby to sunlight.
After that, short exposures would be safe except
in areas of extremely heavy fallout. As a further
precaution, the baby can be placed in an open,
shallow pit that will provide shielding from radiation
given off by fallout particles on the ground. Initial
exposure should be very short, no more than
10 minutes.
If sufficient milk is not obtainable, even infants
younger than six months should be given solid food.
Solid foods for babies must be pureed to a fine
Table 9.4. Emergency food supply for one baby.
Ingredients Per Day Per Month Per6 Months
Volumes and Ounces Grams Pounds Kilograms Pounds Kilograms
Instant non-fat dry milk I cup + 2 8 6 2.72 32 15
tablespoons
(2', oz)
Vegetable cooking oil 3 tablespoons 30 2 0.90 12 5.5
(1 oz)
Sugar 2 tablespoons 20 1.3 0.60 8 3.6
(0.7oz)
Standard daily multi-vitamin
I , pill 10pills 60 pills
pillstexture. Using a modern baby food grinder makes
pureeing quick and easy work. Under crisis con-
ditions, a grinder should be cleaned and disinfected
like other baby-feeding utensils, as described later in
this section.
Several expedient methods are available: the
food can be pressed through a' sieve, mashed with
a fork or spoon, or squeezed through a porous cloth.
Good sanitation must be maintained; all foods
should be brought to a boil after pureeing to insure
that the food is safe from bacteria.
A pureed solid baby food can be made by first
boiling together ~ parts of a cereal grain and I part
of beans until they are soft. Then the mixture should
be pressed through a sieve. The sieve catches the
tough hulls from the grain kernels and the skins
from the beans. The grain-beans combination will
provide needed calories and a well-supplemented
protein. The beans also supply the additional iron
that a baby needs by the time he is 6 months old.
Flours made from whole grains or beans, as pre-
viously described, also can be used; however, these
may contain more rough material.
Some grains are preferable to others. It iseasier
to sieve cooked corn kernels than cooked wheat
kernels. Since wheat is the grain most likely to cause
allergies, it should not be fed to an infant until he
is 6 to 7 months old if other grains, such as 'rice or
corn, are available.
Small children also need more protein than can
be supplied by grains alone. As a substitute for milk,
some bean food should be provided at every meal. If
the available diet isdeficient inaconcentratedenergy
source such as fat or sugar, a child's feedings should
be increased to 4 or 5 times a day, to enable him to
assimilate more. Whenever possible, a small child
should have a daily diet that contains at least one
ounce of fat (3 tablespoons, without scraping the
spoon). This would provide more than 10% of a
young child's calories in the form offat, which would
be beneficial.
If under emergency conditions it is not practical
to boil infant feeding utensils, they can be sterilized
with a bleach solution. Add one teaspoon of ordinary
household bleach to a quart of water. (Ordinary
household bleach contains 5.25% sodium hypo-
chlorite as its only active ingredient and supplies
approximately 5% available chlorine. If the strength
of the bleach isunknown, add 3teaspoons per quart.)
Directions for safe feeding without boiling follow:
The Utensils (Include at least one I-quart and one
I-pint mason jar, for keeping prepared
formula sterile until used.)
I. Immediately after feeding, wash the inside
and outside ofall utensilsusedto preparetheformula
and to feed the infant.
2. Fill a covered container with clean, cold
water and add the appropriate amount of chlorine
bleach.
3. Totally immerse all utensils until the next
feeding (3 or 4 hours). Besure that the bottle, ifused,
is filled with bleach solution. Keep container
covered.
At Feeding Time
I. Wash hands before preparing food.
2. Remove utensils trom the disinfectant chlo-
rine solution and drain, but do not rinse or dry.
3. Prepare formula; feed the baby.
4. 