 reduced. For example, if the
air-exhaust opening is only 13/4 sq. ft e/4 the size of
this KAP), then this KAP will pump only about
500 cfm. A!1d if the air-exhaust opening is only a
6 X 6-in. exhaust duct e/4 sq. ft), then this same
36 X 29-in. KAP will pump only about 50 cubic
feet per minute. This would not provide enough
outdoor air for more than one shelter occupant in a
well-insulated shelter under heat-wave conditions in
the hottest humid. parts of the United States. In
contrast, when the weather is freezing cold and the"
shelter itself is still cold enough to absorb the heat
produced by the shelter occupants, this same
6 X 6-in. exhaust duct and the air-intake doorway
will cause about 50 cfm of outdoor air to flow by
itself through the shelter without using any pump.
The reason: body heat warms the shelter air, and
the warm air rises if cold air can flow in to replace
it. Under these cold conditions-provided the air is
distributed evenly throughout the shelter by KAP
or otherwise-50 cfm IS enough outdoor arr for
about 17 people.
To provide adequately large air passageways
for air-supply KAPs used to ventilate shelters in
buildings, in addition to opening and closing doors
and windows, it may be necessary to build large
ducts (as described below). Breaking holes in
windows, ceilings, or walls is another way to make
large, efficient air passageways.
Figure 15 illustrates how a 3-ft KAP can be
used as a combined air-supply and air-distribution
pump to adequately ventilate a small underground
shelter that has an exhaust opening too small to
provide enough ventilation in warm weather. (A
similar installation can be used to ventilate a
basement room having only one opening, its
doorway.) Note how, by installing a "divider" in
the doorway and entryway, the single entryway is
converted into a large air-intake duct and a
separate, large air-exhaust duct. To obtain the
maximum increased volume of fresh outdoor air
that can be pumped through the shelter-a total of
about 1000 cfm for a 36 X 29-in. KAP-the divider
should extend about 4 ft horizontally into the
shelter room, as shown in Fig. 15. The 6 ft at the
end of the divider (the almost-horizontal part under
the KAP) can be made of plywood, provided it is
installed so that it can be taken out of the way in a
few seconds.
ORNL DWG 72-6630
FALLOUT ROOF (PLASTIC
OR CLOTH) ON RIDGEPOLE
"WALL" ALL AROUND
ENTRYWAY
~~;;:~:- EARTH ON BOTTOM~ <»: OF "WALL"'~ 0.'_
',,' "STAKE SUPPORTING 2-ft-HIGH
"WALL" OF PLASTIC OR CLOTH
AROUND VERTICAL ENTRYWAY
ENTRYWAY DIVIDER
(PLASTIC OR CLOTH)
\
VENT[LATION DUCT
i
THAT [S TOO SMALL IN
WARM WEATHER
ENTERING AIR RISES.
LEAVING FALLOUT 'l~
~ ;X PARTICLES OUTSlOE "
~J "\
Fig. 15. Ventilating a shelter when the air-exhaust opening is too small.Note how the entry of fallout into a shelter can
be minimized by covering the entryway with a"roof"
and by forcing the slow-moving entering air to rise
over an obstruction (the "wall") before it flows into
the shelter. The sand-like fallout particles fall to the
ground outside the "wall."
C. Adequate Distribution of
Air Within the Shelter
To make sure that each shelter occupant gets a
fair share of the outdoor air pumped through the
shelter, air-distribution KAPs should be used inside
most large shelters. These KAPs are used within the
shelter, separate from and in addition to air-supply
KAPs (see Fig. 16).Air-distribution KAPs can serve
in place of both air-distribution ducts and cooling
fans. For these purposes, one or more 3-ft-high KAPs
hung overhead from the shelter ceiling are usually
most practical. 