 the edge of a
firmly held ruler. to cut 9 strips. of which you will select the best two. When cutting.
hold the knife almost horizontal, with the plane of its blade perpendicular to the
taped-down film. Throughout this procedure avoid touching the center parts of the
strips.
5. A piece of clear plastic film - a 6 x 6 inch square. Clear vinyl (4 mils thick) used for
storm-proofing windows is best. butany reasonably stoutand clear plastic will serve.
The strong clear plastic used to wrap pieces of cheese. if washed with hot water and
soap. is good. Do not use weak plastic orcellophane. plastic film made from cellulose
(such as Flex-a-Pane) and roasting bags are too permeable to water vapor.
h. Cloth duct tape ("silver tape"). or masking tape. or freezer tape. or Scotch-type tape
-about 10 square inches. (A roll of Scotch Magic Transparent Tape. if available.
should be saved for use in charging the KFM).
7. Band-Aid tape. or masking tape, or'freezer tape. or Scotch transparent tape, or other thin and
very flexible tapes about 2 square inches.
X. Gypsum wallboard (sheetrock) about I 2square foot, best about 1/2 inch thick, for a good
homemade drying agent. (Silica gel with dark blue color indicator is an even better
drying agent. but is not available in most communities. Available from chemical
supply firms that supply high school chemistry classes. With dark blue silica gel in
the bottom of a KFM. white typing correction fluid or white ink is needed to make the
lower edges of a KFM's aluminum leaves easier to see.)
9. Glue not essential. but useful to replace Band-Aid and other thin tapes. "One hour"epoxy is
best. Model airplane cement is satisfactory.
10. An ordinary wooden pencil and a small toothpick (or split a small sliver of wood.)
II. Two strong rubber bands. or string.
12. Several small, transparent plastie bags. such as sandwich bags, to cover the KFM when it is
exposed where fallout particles may get on it and contaminate it. Or pieces of thin. transparent
plastic film. such as that from bread bags. Also small rubber bands. or string.
B. For the Charging Devices:
I. Most hard plastic rubbed on dry paper. This is the best method.
a. Plexiglas and most other hard plastics. such as are used in draftsmen's triangles. common
smooth plastic rulers, etc. - at least 6 inches long.
b. Dry paper ~- Tough paper, such as clean, strong grocery-bag or typing paper. Tissue paper,
newspaper. or facial tissue such as Kleenex. or toilet paper are satisfactory for charging. but
not as durable.
2. Scotch Magic Transparent Tape (3/4 inch width is best). or Scotch Transparent Tape, or P.V.e.
(Polyvinyl chloride) insulating electriealtapes, or a few of the other common brands of Scotch-
type tapes. (Some plastic tapes do not develop sufficiently high-voltageelectrostatic charges when
unrolled quickly.) This method cannot be used for charging a KFM inside a dry-bucket. needed
for charging when the air is very humid.
e. For Determining Dose Rates and Recording Doses Received:
I. A watch with a second hand.
2. A flashlight or other light, for reading the KFM in a dark shelter or at night.
3. Pencil and paper - preferably a notebook.
D. For the Dry-Bucket: A KFM must becharged inside a dry-bucket ifthe air isvery humid, as it often
isinside acrowded, long-occupied shelter lackll1gadequate forced venulatton.)
. I. A large bucket, pot, or can, preferably with a top diameter of at least II inches.
2. Clear plastic (best is 4-mil-thick clear plastic used for storm windows). A square piece 5 inches
wider on a side than the diameter of the bucket to be used.
3. Cloth duct tape. one inch wide and 8 feet long (or 4 ft., if2 inches wide). Or 16ft. offreezer tape
one inch wide.
ztr:
-1
;;0
C
nj
oz
,Vl
;;,0
~
0'-
N
-00Ieo
0>
0..