 is given to help the reader
understand the importance of building a good shelter
and to help him distinguish between symptoms of
common illnesses and first symptoms of radiation
sickness.
The first symptoms of radiation sickness are
nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, and a generalfeeling of illness." These symptoms begin several
hours after exposure to acute doses of 100R to 200 R,
and within 30 minutes or less after receiving a fatal
dose. A source of probable confusion is the fact that
one or more of these symptoms is experienced by
many people when they are first exposed to great
danger, as in an air raid shelterduringa conventional
bombardment.
The occupants of a shelter might worry unneces-
sarily for weeks, mistaking their early emotional
reactions for the initial phase of radiation sickness.
This would be particularly true if they had no
dependable instrument for measuring radiation, or
if none of them knew how to use such an
instrument.
The initial symptoms end within a day or two.
Then follows the latent phase of radiation sickness,
during which the patient experiences few, if any,
symptoms. If the dose received was in the non-fatal
range. the latent' phase may last as long as'
2 weeks.
In the final phase. the victim of serious or fatal
radiation sickness will have reduced resistance to
infections and is likely to suffer diarrhea. loss of hair,
and small hemorrhages of the skin, mouth, and; or
intestinal tract. Diarrhea from common causes may
be confused with the onset of radiation sickness, but
hemorrhages and loss of much hair are clear indica-
tions of having received serious. but not necessarily
fatal. radiation exposure. The final phase usually
lasts for one to two months. Any availableantibiotics
should be reserved for this critical phase of
the iIIness.
Doses of 1000 R to 5000 R result in bloody
diarrhea. fever. and blood circulation abnormalities,
with the initial symptoms beginning within less than
30 minutes after exposure and the final phase
occurring less than a day thereafter. Death results
within 2 to 14 days. The victim of a dose of over
5000 R dies a hard death within 48 hours, due to
radiation damage to the central nervous system.
Recovery from most cases of radiation sickness
will be more likely for patients who receive a well
balanced diet, rest. freedom from stress, and clean
surroundings. But most patients, even without these
advantages, willsurvive-s-as proved by the survival of
thousands of Hiroshima and Nagasaki citizens who
suffered serious radiation sickness. Nursing radiation
victims is not hazardous. Even persons dying from a
dose of 5000 Rare not sources ofdangerous radiation
by wartime standards, and radiation sickness is not
contagious.
LIFETIME RISKS FROM RADIATION
The large radiation doses that many survivors ofa
nuclear attack would receive would result in serious
long-term risks ofdeathfrom cancer,butthelifetime
risks from even large wartime radiation doses
are not as bad as many people believe. Signifi-
cantly, no official U.S. estimates have been
made available to the public regarding excess
cancer deaths to be expected if America is
subjected to a nuclear attack. However, reliable
statistics are available on the numbers of addi-
tional fatal cancers suffered by persons who
received large whole-body radiation doses at
Hiroshimaandinotherdisasters, andwholived
for months to decades before dying. Dr. John N.
Auxier-who for years was a leading health
physicist at Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
was one of the American scientists working in
Japan with Japanese scientists studying the
Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors, and cur-
rently is working on radiation problems with
InternationalTechnology Corporation-in 1986
summarized for me the risk of excess fatal
cancersfrom largewhole-body radiation doses:
"If1,000peopleeach receivea whole-bodyradia-
tion dose of 100 rems [or 100 rads, or 100 R],
about 10 additional fatal cancers will result."
These 10 fatal cancers will be in addition to
about 150 fatal cancers that normally will de-
velop among these 1,000 people during their
lifetimes. This risk is proportional to large
doses; thus, if1,000peopleeach receive a doseof
200 rems, about 20 additional lethal cancer
cases would be expected.
"Rem"isan abbreviationfor "roentgenequivalent
(in) man. 