 can are taped down to the
can or otherwise restricted.
e. The leaf-suspending parts of the threads inside the can do not cross over,
entangle or restrict each other.
f. The threads come together where they go over the rim of the can. and
the leaves are flat and hang together as shown in the first photo illustration.
."An Uncharged KFM".
g. The leaves look like these photographed leaves. If not. make new,
better leaves and install them.
Coverwith tape the parts of the threads that extend down the outside ofthe can,
and also cover with more tape the small pieces of tape near the ends of the
threads on the outside of the can. Oruse epoxyorotherwaterproofglue to
attach the parts of the threads onthe ~ ofthe can securelyto the
can.
1.
2.
3.
4.REMINDERS FOR OPERATORS REMINDERS FOR OPERATORS
The drying agent inside a KFM is
O.K. if, when the charged KFM is
not exposed to radiation, its readings
decrease by I mm or less in 3 hours.
Reading: With the reading eye 12
inches vertically above the seat, note
on the mm scale the separationof the
lower edges of the leaves. If the right
leaf isat 10mm and the left leaf isat
7rnm, the KFM reads 17mm. Never
take a reading whilea leaf istouching
a stop-thread. Never use a KFM
reading that is less than 5 mm,
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and if
after a I-rninute exposure it reads 5
mrn, the difference in readings is 12
mm. The attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.6 RIhr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: If a person works
outside for 3 hours where the dose
rate is 2 R/hr, what is his radiation
dose? Answer: 3 hr x 2 RIhr =6 R.
Finding how long it takes to get a
eertain R dose: If the dose rate is 1.6
RIhr outside and a person iswilling
to take a 6 R dose, how long can he
remain outside? Answer:
6 R +1.6 Rj hr =3.75 hr =
3 hours and 45 minutes.
Falloutradialion guidesfor a healthy
person not previouslyexposed to a
total radiation dose of more than
100 R during a 2-week period:
6 R per day can betolerated for up to
two months without losing the ability
to work.
100R ina week or lessis not likelyto
seriously sicken.
350R in a few days results in a
50-50 chance of dying, under
post-attack conditions.
600 R in a week or less is almost
certain to cause death within a few
weeks.
The drying agent inside a KFM is
O.K. if, when Ihe charged KFM is
not exposed to radiation, its readings
decrease by.I mm or lessin 3 hours.
Reading: With the reading eye 12
inches vertically above the seat. note
on the mm scalethe separationofthe
lower edges of the leaves. Ifthe right
leaf isal 10mm and the left leaf isat
7mm, the KFM reads 17mm. Never
take a reading whilea leaf istouching
a stop-thread. Never use a KFM
reading that is less than 5 mm.
Finding a dose rate: If before ex-
posure a KFM reads 17 mm and if
after a I-minute exposure it reads 5
rnm, the difference in readings is 12
mm. The attached table shows the
dose rate was 9.6 RIhr during the
exposure.
Finding a dose: If a .person works
outside for 3 hours where the dose
rate is 2 RIhr, what is his radiation
dose? Answer: 3 hr x 2 RIhr =6 R.
Finding how long it takes 10 g~t a
certain R dose: If the dose rate is 1.6
RIhr outside and a person is willing
10 take a 6 R dose, how long can he
remain outside? Answer:
6 R + 1.6 Rj hr =3.75 hr =
3 hours and 45 minutes.
