 stored outside target areas.
About 100,000 civil defense troops are main-
tained for control, rescue, and post-attack re-
covery duties. The annual per capita cost of
Russian civil defense preparations, if made at
costs equivalentto those inthe United States, is
variously estimated to be between $8 and $20.
Switzerland has the best civil defense sys-
tem, one that already includes blast shelters for
over85 percent of all its citizens. Swiss invest-
ment in this most effective kind of war-risk
insurance has continued steadily for decades.
According to Dr. Fritz Sager, the Vice Director
of Switzerland's civil defense, in 1984 the cost
was the equivalent of $12.60 per capita.
Incontrast,ourFederalEmergencyManage-
ment Agency, that includes nuclear attack
preparedness among its many responsibilities,
will receive only about $126 million in fiscal
1987. This will amountto about55 centsfor each
American. And only a small fraction of this
pittance will be available for nuclear attack
preparedness! Getting out better self-help sur-
vival instructions is about all that FEMA could
afford to' do to improve Americans' chances of
survivinga nuclearwar, unlessFEMA'sfunding
forwar-relatedcivildefenseisgreatlyincreased.
PRACTICALITY OF MAKING SURVIVAL
PREPARATIONS DURING A CRISIS
The emphasis in this book is on survival
preparations that can be made in the last few
days of a worsening crisis. However, the mea-
sures put into effect during such a crisis can be
very much more effective if plans and some
preparations are completed well in advance. It
is hopedthatpersonswhoread this bookwillbe
motivated at least to make the preparations
outlined in Chapter 16, Minimum Pre-Crisis
Preparations.
Well-informedpersonsrealizethata nuclear
attack by the Soviet Union is unlikely to be a
Pearl-Harbor-type of attack, launched without
warning. Strategists agree that a nuclear war
most likely would begin after a period of days-
to-months of worsening crisis. The most realis-
tic of the extensive Russian plans and prepara-
tions to survive a nuclear war are based on
usingatleast severaldaysduringanescalating
crisisto getmost urbandwellersoutofthecities
and other high risk areas, to build or improve
shelters in all parts of the Soviet Union, and to
protect essential machinery and the like. The
Russians know that ifthey are able to complete
evacuation and sheltering plans before the out-
breakofnuclearwar,the numberoftheir people
killed would bea small fraction of those who
otherwise would die. Our satellites and other
sources of intelligence would reveal such mas-
sive movements within a day; therefore, under
the mostlikelycircumstancesAmericanswould
have several days in which to make Iife-saving
preparations.The Russians have learned from the devas-
tating wars they have survived that people are
the most important asset to be saved. Russian
civil defense publications emphasize Lenin's
justly famous statement: "The primary produc-
tive factor of all humanity is the laboring man,
the worker. If he survives, we can save every-
thing and restore everything ... but we shall
perish if we are not able to save him." Strate-
gists conclude that those in power in the Soviet
Union are very unlikely to launch a nuclear
attack until they have protected most of their
people.
The reassurance of having at least a few
days of pre-attack warning, however, is lessen-
ing. The Increasing numbers of Soviet blast
shelters and of first-strike offensive weapons
capableofdestroyingourundefendedretaliatory
weapons will reduce the importance of pre-
attack city evacuation as a means of saving
Russian lives. These ongoing developments
will make it less likely that Americans will
have a few days' warningbefore a Sovietattack,
and therefore should motivate our Government
both to deploy truly defensive Star Wars wea-
pons andto buildblastshelters to protecturban
Americans.
NuclearweaponsthatcouldstriketheUnited
States continue to increase in accuracy as well
as numbers;themostmodernwarheadsusually
can hitwithina few hundredfeet of theirprecise
targets. The Soviet Union already has enough
warheadsto targetallmilitarilyimportantfixed-
site objectives. 