 of particles in the
1.0-5.0micron range, yetwhen clean its resistance toan airflowof200
cfm isonly about 0.2 in. watergauge(about0.007 psi). Its cost isabout
twice thatofagood ordinary furnace filterofthesamesize. However,
it has approximatelythree times the lifeofa standard panel type filter
before becoming overloaded. Disposable pleated air filters are avail-
able in larger cities.
USE
The illustrated homemade filter has such low resistance to airflow
that, when up to about 200 cfm is being pumped through it by a
Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump, the air volume is decreased by
only about 10 percent, as compared to the volume pumped with no
filter in the ventilation system. With a homemade Plywood Double-
Action Piston Pump, up to approximately 200 cfm can be pumped
through this filter even when the total difference in air pressure
(caused by the ventilation pipes, a dirty filter, etc. that restrict
airflow) is high, about 5 inches water gauge (0.18 psi).
Even if the United States suffers an all-out Soviet attack, only a
small partof its area will besubjected to blasteffectssevereenough to
injure the occupants of fallout shelters. (Fallout shelters are not
designed to withstand blast, butespeciallytypicalearth-coveredones
afford consequential blast protection.) In contrast, an installed filter,
unless protected by an efficient blastvalve, will be wrecked by aquite
low-pressure blast wave that comes down its open air-intake pipe
-even if the small partof the blast wave that would enter the shelter
room through its open ventilation pipes is not nearly powerful enough
toinjuretheshelteroccupants. Thus unprotected installed filters will
be wrecked in an area several times as large as the area in which
occupants of fallout shelters will be injured by blast.
To be sure of having a filter in good condition, you can:
1. Make and keep in your shelter an extra complete filter, ready to
replace your installed filter if it is damaged, or if it becomes
overloaded with dust and its resistance to airflow becomes too high.
Furthermore, if your filter is installed in your shelter room and
becomes so radioactive with retained fallout particles that it is
delivering a consequential radiation dose to shelter occupants, it is
advantageous to be able to remove it, pitch it out, 'and install a
replacement filter. (To be able to supply your shelter with unfiltered
air in peacetime or after the end of consequential fallout danger, you
should make and keep ready a duct with appropriate fittings to
connect your pump directly to its air-intake pipe.)
2. Ifyou have only one filter, do not install it beforeyou need tofilter
the air supply. Connect your pump directly to the air-intake pipe,
using an appropriate duct and fittings. Then before the attack and
before the arrival of fallout (revealed by your fallout-monitoring
instrument), keep your shelter well ventilated with unfiltered air.
Whetheror not yourfilter is installed, stop ventilatingyourshelterfor
a few hours while heavy fallout is being deposited outside - unless
heat-humidityconditionsbecome unbearable. Ifbeforeshelterventila-
tion is stopped the shelter air does not contain an abnormally high
concentration of carbon dioxide, then nooutdoor air need be supplied
for about 5 hours to prevent building up too high a concentration of
respiratory carbon dioxide - provided there is about 70cubic feet of
shelter-room volume for each occupant.
AN ENCOURAGING REMINDER
Persons making preparations to improve their chances ofsurviving
an all-out attack should realize that if the United States is hit with
warheads the sizes ofthose in the 1987 Sovietintercontinental arsenal,
the fallout particles of critical concern will be much larger than the
extremely small particles (l to 5 microns in diameter) which are not
completely removed'bythisfilter. Falloutparticlesthissmall produced
by large nuclear explosions do not fall to the ground for many days to
months after the nuclear explosions, by which time they have become
much less radioactive. Essentially all of the larger particles can be
removed merely by filtering the air through a few thicknesses of bath
towel cloth.