 plywood part slightly back and forth
against the other. while pressing them together-thus making sure
that both surfaces are coated and in close' contact. Wait until the
adhesive sets and bonds adequately before attaching more parts.)
5. Draw two parallellineson the unfinished sideofthe PARTITION,
each ;] inches from one of its ends. Adhere the two 12-in.-long
unattached edgesof the valve frames to the PARTITION on these two
lines. as illustrated by Figs. 2, 7and 12.Allow time for the adhesive to
set.
6. Before permanentlyattachingside V. position it vertically with a
long edge restingon the top. and with a side-edgeof the PARTITION
and ends of the two valve frames I and II in contact with the finished
side ofside V. See Fig. 7.On the unfinished (outer) sideofside Vdraw
lines showing the positions of the PARTITION and of the two valve
frames in contact with the finished side of side V.
7. Preparatory to attaching side V to the PARTITION and to the
two valve frames. drill 4 slightly oversize screw holes (for your 2-in.
roundhead screws) through side V. Drill these holes so that a screw
will go into an end of each valve frame about 1 in. from its adhered
edge. and the other 2 screws will go into the side-edge of the
PARTITION. at points above the valve frames. Next. with side V
temporarily in its final position, drill with a smaller diameter drill
through the 4 holes in side V. into the PARTITION and into the two
valve frames. Then with the 4 screws temporarily connectside V, the
PARTITION. and the two valve frames, and, while checking with a
carpenter's square the squareness of the angle between the PARTI-
TION and side V, adjust the two pairs ofscrews to attain squareness.
Remove side V.
8. Apply adhesive to the 3/4-in.-wideareaalongthe longedgeof the
top, and if necessary a thicker coating of adhesive than normal to
unattached edges of the PARTITION and of the two valve frames.
Then promptly position side V, and by again screwing in and
adjustingthe 4screws, maketheangle between the PARTITIONand
side V square. Allow the adhesive to set.
9. Use short pieces of duct tape to temporarily attach the two 12x
12-in. construction forms to the PARTITION and to side V. (Before
using these forms, drive 4small nails into each form, near its corners,
to serve as handles for removingthem from thecompleted"cylinder"}
Attach a construction form near each end of the PARTITION.
10. Adhere the finished side of side VI to the top, to the unattached
side-edge of the PARTITION, and to end-edges of the valve frames,
while keeping side VI pressed against the two square construction
forms. To keep side VI pressed against the construction forms until
the adhesivesets, use small nails to temporarily nail two small boards
horizontally across the ends of the sides, at each end of the "box".
11. On the finished side of the bottom IX. draw two parallel lines
13-1/2-in. apart. making each line 6-3/4-in. from the center line of the
bottom, as shown in Fig. 7. Nail the two 3/4 x 3/4 x 32-in. spacer
boards VII and VIII to the bottom. 13-1/2-in. apart.
12. To attach the bottom, first place it (with its finished side down)
on the exposed long-edgesofthesides. Ifyou find thatthe bottom rests
on the construction forms and is not in contact with the long-edges of
the sides, in effect increase the heights of the sides by coating with
adhesive both the edges of the sides and the 3/4-in.-wide area of the
bottom to which the sides will be adhered. Then adhere the bottom
onto the edges of the sides. Before the adhesive hardens, remove any
that has been squeezed into the corner of the "cylinder"..-
(!)W
wa::IW
a..I
<IO...J.-
C\JIL.
II
WV(/)~
;;'0-,0 I
r0...Jr0
a..
<I...Ju,
--. a. _-
CUT OUT 2x4"IN. 