 to the same
conclusionregardingChinesepermanentpublic
shelters: thosethathave been built, and thatstill
are being built, are almost all useful both in
peacetime and in wartime.
If a family can use its shelter without
having to go outside and be exposed to rain,
snow, cold, or night problems, its dual use
shelter will be a more valuable peacetime asset
than a shelter not directly connected to the
house. Furthermore, a directlyconnectedshelter
can be entered more quickly in a crisis, and
probably will reduce post-attack exposures to
fallout radiation received by persons carrying
things into the shelter, or by those moving
about post-attackto protectthe home. The main
disadvantages of a directly connected shelter
are that it usually provides poorer protection
againstheat, smoke andcarbonmonoxideifthe
house burns and that it is more expensive to
build than an earth-covered shelter with an
outdoor walk-in entrance, such as the one illus-
trated in Figs. 17.1 and 17.2.
AN EMERGENCY EXIT THAT ALSO
PROVIDES A SECOND LARGE
VENTILATION OPENING
Having an emergency exit in a fallout shel-
ter is not as important as having one in a blast
shelter, unless the fallout shelter is under or
connected to a building. (Since buildings are
likely to burn, itis importantto have a means of
escape.) However, an emergency exit makes
any shelter more practical to live in than a
shelterwithonlyonelargeopening- especially
in a heavyfallout areawhereitmaybe necessary
to stay inside most of the time for weeks or
months. Occupants of a shelter with only one
large opening will not have adequate natural
ventilation and will have to keep laboriously
pumpingair- atleastintermittently- through
the air-supply pipes to maintain liveable tem-
perature and/or humidity conditions.
Byopeningboth a shelter'sentrance and its
e-mergency exit,andtakingmeasurestoprevent
the entry of rain, snow, and all but the smallest
fallout particles (see Appendix F), natural ven-
tilationwillbeadequatemostofthe time, except
inhot,cal-mweather.\Nithtwolar'E,eo\)en\:n.'E,s,a
homemade KAP (see Appendix B) can be used
to pump enough outdoorairthrough the shelter,
with much less work than is required to pump
less air with a relatively high-pressure pump
through typical ventilation pipes.
A DEPENDABLE, HIGH-PROTECTION-
FACTOR EMERGENCY EXIT
Occupants of a shelter with a dependable
emergency exit will have less fear of being
trappedifthe mainentryisblocked.Iftheyopen
the exit, they also will be able to ventilate the
shelter with natural ventilation through the
entry and the exit, or with forced ventilation by
operating a KAP.
To provide excellent radiation protection, a
typical high-PF emergency exit is filled with
sand. Suchanexithas a bolted-onsteel plate on
its bottom inside the shelter, and an easily cut,
waterproof, plastic-film covering over its top,
which is a few inches below ground level..
Obvious disadvantages of this typical sand-
filled emergency exit include the difficulty of
safely removing the bottom plate while sand is
pressing down on it, and the impossibility of
cutting the plastic film over the top of the exit
without having fallout-contaminated earth fall
on the person who does the cutting, and into the
shelterroom. Furthermore,iftheearth covering
thetopofanemergencyexitisfrozen, occupants
may be unable to break through it and get out.
An improved design of sand-filled emer-
gency exit was conceived by Dr. Conrad V.
Chester of Oak Ridge National Laboratory and
in 1986 was further improved, built, and tested
in a full-scale model bythe author. As shown in
Fig. 17.2, the sand in this 26 x 26-inch square
vertical exit was supported by a piece of 3/4-
inch exterior plywood, that should be of the
previously mentioned rot-proof type, pressure
impregnated with wood preservative.
Inthecenterofthis251f2x 251f2-inch plywood
sand-support was an 8-inch-diameter hole cov-
ered withtwo thicknessesofstrongnyloncloth.