a shelterwall. It occupieslessthan half
the floor space used by the two hammocks shown in
the preceding illustration. If a reclining seat is
desired, the two support-points· on the ceiling to
which the chair-arm cords are attached can be
located farther out from the wall.
Enough padding material should be placed in
the bowl-shaped seat of a Bedsheet-Chair to make it
rather flat. Extra clothing or a folded blanket can be
used. The three cords suspending the chair should be
adjusted for length so that the sitter's feet can rest on
the floor and the edge of the chair seat does notpress
on the undersides of his thighs. (Such pressure cuts
off circulation. During the London Blitz of World
War II, many of the people who sat night after night
in shelters on folding chairs with canvas seats
Fig. 14.5. A Bedsheet-Hammock converted
into a comfortable suspended Bedsheet-Chair.
developed serious leg conditions. Authorities later
prohibited bringing such chairs into shelters.)
CAUTION: To prevent skin infections and
other diseases from spreading, a person's
hammock or chair should not be used byothers.
This precaution is particularly important if the
shelter is hot and its occupants are sweaty.
HOW TO MAKE A BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK
AND CONVERT IT TO A SUSPENDED
BEDSHEET-CHAIR
1. PURPOSE: To enable more people to occupy a
shelter more comfortably.
2. ADVANTAGES:
* The hammock can be made in a few minutes,
once you have the materials and the know-
how.
* The only materials required are a strong
double-bed sheet (or an equally large piece ofany strong fabric), a few feet of rope (or a
piece of strong fabric from which expedient
"rope"can be madequickly), a fewlarge nails,
and some wire.
• It is difficult to fall out of the hammock
because its sides are each made about8 inches
shorter than its lengthwise mid-section, so as
to produce a boat-like shape.
• It provides room for head and shouldersclose
to either end; thus it is practical to hang this
hammock between supports that are as close
together as 6 feet. See Fig. 14.6.
Before beginning .work, someone should read
aloud all of the instructions for making the
hammock. This will help to avoid mistakes.
Fig. 14.6. The author lying in a Bedsheet-
Hammock. (Note that he is pulling the operating
cord of a homemade shelter-ventilating pump, a
KAP.)
MAKING A BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK
A. How to fold and tie the bedsheet:
1. Select a strong double-bed sheet (one
containingpolyester isbest) and use a ruleror
tape measure to avoid guessing at measure-
ments.
2. Fold the bedsheet lengthwise down its center
line, so that pairs of corners are together.
3. With the sheet folded, mark the center of
each of the two folded ends; then hold one
end up.
4. Starting at one corner of one end of the
folded bedsheet, make accordion-like pleats.
Make each pleat about 2 inches wide; make
the left corner of each pleat about 1 inch
lower than the left corner of the preceding
pleat, when the sheet is being held as
illustrated. Use your left hand to hold the
completed pleats in place, while making new
pleats with your right hand.
ORNL-DWG 77-17387
CENTER MARK
UPPER ENDOF
FOLDED BEDSHEET
OlUIl.-OWG 71-17388
ORNL-DWG77-173895. When one-half of the upper end of the sheet
has been folded into pleats almost to the
CENTER MARK, adjust the pleats so that
the CENTER MARK isabout4 inches below
the STARTING CORNER.
6. Continue making 2-inch pleats on past the
CENTER MARK, but make the right corner
of each pleat about 1 inch higher than the
right corner of the preceding pleat. When the
pleat-folding is completed, the STARTING
CORNER and the other corner should be at
the same height (4 inches) above the
CENTER MARK.
7. Tie ·the hammock-supporting rope tightly
around the end of the .sheet about 3 inches
below the edge with the CENTER MARK.
