 the
second time when coveringthe completed shelter
roof.)
7. Stake out the complete shelter, and then dig by
removing layers of earth.
8. When digging 'earth that is too firm to shovel
without first breaking it up, start picking (or
breaking with a shovel) in aline across the center
of the trench. Next, shovel out a narrow trench 6
or 8 in. deep all the way across the width of the
trench. Then with pick or shovel break off row
after row of earth all the way across the width of
the trench, as illustrated.
OltNL-DWG ~1a12
9. When digging a trench, to avoid having to move
the excavated earth twice more to get itout of the
way, first pile all earth about 8 ft away from the
trench. Later, pile additional earth you are
excavating at least 3 ft away.
10. Never risk a cave-in bydigging into lower parts of
an earth wall. It is dangerous to produce even a
small overhanging section of wall or to dig a
small, cave-like enlargement of a shelter.
11. When making a "sandbag" of a pillowcase or
sack to hold earth shielding in place around the
sides of shelter openings or along the edges of a
shelter roof, fill it so that it will be only about
two-thirds full after its opening is tied shut
securely. Avoid dropping the sandbag.
12. If sufficient sandbags are not available, make
earth-filled "rolls." Bed sheets or any reasonably
strong fabric or plastic film can be used to make
these rolls as described below. (To makea longer
roll than the one illustrated below, several
persons should make one together, standingside-
by-side.)
To make an 8-in.-high earth-filled roll:
(I) Select a piece of cloth at least as strong as a
new bed sheet, 2 ft longer than the side of the
opening to be protected, and 5 ft wide.
(2)' Place 2 ft of the width of the cloth on the
ground, as illustrated.
ORNL-DWG 78-16213
(3) While using both hands to hold up and pull
on 3 ft of the width of the cloth and pressing
against the cloth with your body, have
another person shovelearth onto and against
the cloth.
(4) While still pulling on the cloth, pull the upper
part down over the earth that covers the
lower part of the cloth.(5) Cover the upper part of the cloth with earth
so as to form an earth-filled "hook" near the
upper edge, as illustrated.
ORNL-DWG 78-16214
SLOPE EARTH TO DRAIN
CLOTH
FINISHED 8 in. ROLL
(6) If a greater thickness of rolls is needed, level
the earth on top of a roll; then make anotner
earth-filled roll on this level surface.
13. Cut and haul poles and logs more easily bydoing
the following:
(I) Take time to sharpen your tools before
starting to work-no matter how rushed you
feel.
(2) When sawing green trees that have gummy
resin or sap, oil your saw with kerosene or
diesel fuel. Ifyou don't have these, use motor
oil, grease, or even soap.
(3) When felling a small tree, the following
method will help make a square cut, keep
your saw from being pinched, and help make
the tree fall in the desired direction: (a) Saw
the tree about one-third through on the side
toward which you want it to fall. (b) Then
start sawing the opposite side, while another
person pushes on the tree with a IO-ftpush-
pole. pressing the end of the. push-pole
against the tree about lOft above the ground.
A push-pole with a forked end-s-or with a big
nail on the end-is best.
(4) After a tree has been felled, trim off all limbs
and knots so that the pole or log is smooth
and will require no additional smoothing
ORNL-DWG 78-16210
when you get ready to move it, or to use itfor
building your shelter. Make and use a
measuring stick to speed up measuring and
cutting poles and logs to the right lengths.
(5) It usually is best first to cut the poles exactly
two or threetimes the final length of the poles
to be used in the shelter.
