 instruments
include approximately 600,000 dose rate meters
and about 3,300,000 dosimeters, all suitable for
wartime use. In 1986 almost all of these old
instruments-thatcanbe found-reportedlystill
are in good working condition. Because ofcon-
tinuing inadequate funding for civil defense, in
. recent years most of FEMA's instruments have
been serviced, calibrated, and, if necessary,
repaired only once every four years. In a few
localitiestheseinstrumentsareno longerbeing
serviced.
Most of these critically important instru-
ments are keptin cities,in buildings likelyto be
destroyed by blast or fire in the event of a
massive Soviet attack. If there were a suffi-
ciently long, officially recognized period of
warning before an attack, it might be possible
during such a worsening crisis to move a large
fraction of thesefallout metersoutsidethe areas
of probable blast or fire damage, and to place
them in officially designated fallout shelters.
However, this unlikely development would not
provide private family shelters with instru-
ments.
Mostfamilies needtheirownfallout meters.
This need is greatest for families living inlocalitiesnotlikelytobedamagedbyblastorfire,
and for those planning to evacuate to such less
hazardous localities during a worsening crisis.
COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE
FALLOUT METERS
In 1987 an American does not have many
choices if he wants to buy an off-the-shelf dose
rate meter suitable for measuring the high
levelsoffallout radiationthat wouldresultfrom
a nuclear attack. Although inexpensive dose
rate meters and dosimeters have been under
development by the military services and civil
defense researchers for the past 15 years, they
have not been produced commercially for sale
to the public. Field tests of factory-produced
modelshav.e not been completedatthis writing.
Dose Rate Meters
The best radiation-measuring instrument
for wartimeuse availableinthe United Statesin
1987 is the Universal Survey Meter RD-l0,
manufactured in Finland by Alnor Oy. It is sold
in the United States by a subsidiary, Alnor
Nuclear,2585 WashingtonRoad, Suite 120, Pitts-
burg, Pennsylvania 15241. In 1988 the FOB-
price, pre-paid, is$1,100.00. TheRD-l0accurate-
ly measures gamma and X raysfrom veryclose
to natural background radiation up to 300 R/hr,
in two ranges (0.03 - 300 mR/hr, and 0.03 - 300
R/hr). It meets Finnish Army standards for
ruggedness and accurate operation in sub-zero
cold (down to -25°C, or -13°F); it has an illumi-
nated scale for night use and an audible pulse
rate signal, and is built to withstand electro-
magnetic pulse (EMP) effects. (A few of my
friends and I for years have owned Finnish
instruments of an earlier model, the RD-8; they
still are in excellent working condition.)
A less expensive dose rate meter designed
for ruggedwartimeuseisthe Portable Radiolog-
icalDoseRate MeterPDRM82, manufacturedin
England by Plessey Controls Limited, Sopers
Lane, Poole, Dorset BH17 7ER, England. This
instrument is the current standard issue of the
British armed forces and civil defense, is de-
signed for a storage life of at least 20 years, is
microcomputer controlled, EMP-proof, and dis-
plays "FAIL" if a fault exists. (Like all instru-
ments, occasionally a PDRM 82 does fail. One
bought by a friend in 1987 and tested by a radia-
tion laboratory in Utah read 86 centigrays per
hour when it should have read 300, and failed to
display"FAIL." Mailedbackto England,Plessey
Controls finally replaced it with another new
PDRM82.)Theonlyconsequentialdisadvantages
of the PDRM 82, compared to more expensive
dose rate meters, are that it reads in centigrays
per hour (cGy/hr is equivalent to Rads/hr, or
R/hr)anddoes notmeasuredose rateslowerthan
0.1 cGy/hr (100 mR/hr). In 1987 this portable,
four-digit-liquid-display dose rate meteris sold
by Plessey Controls for 250 Brrtish pounds plus
air shipment charges - all pre-paid. 