 group-shelters giving good protection.• The opportunity for men, women, and
children to work together to providegood protection
in minimum time.
• A better chance to benefit from thoughtful
preparations made in advance than would be the case
in public shelters where water, food, etc. must be
shared.
• Less risk of personality clashes, hysteria under
stress, exposure to infectious diseases, and other
problems that arise when strangers are crowded
together for days or weeks.
Disadvantages of earth-covered, expedient
shelters:
• It may be difficult to meet the requirementfor
time, space, people able to work hard, materials, and
tools-and to get all these together at the building
site.
• Building is difficult if heavy rain or snow is.
falling or if the ground is deeply frozen. (However,
untrained Americans have built good fallout shelters
with shielding provided by 5 or more feet of packed
snow, 11 including a winterversion of the Crib-Walled
Pole Shelter described in Appendix A. The practi-
cality of several Russian designs of snow-covered
expedient shelters also has been demonstrated by
winter construction tests in Colorado.")
• The fewer occupants of family shelters could
not provide as many helpful skills as would be found
in most public shelters, with tens-to-thousands of
occupants.
• The lack of instruments for measuring
changing radiation dangers. However, the occupants
could make a homemade fallout meter by following
the instructions in Appendix C, or buy a commercial
instrument before a rapidly worsening crisis arises.
PUBLIC AND OTHER EXISTING SHELTERS
Advantages of the great majority of public and
other existingshelters, most of which are in buildings:
• Their immediate availability in many
localities, without work or the need to supply
materials and tools.
• The provision of fair-to-excellent fallout
protection-generally much better than citizens have
available in their homes.
• The availability in some shelters of fallout
metersand occupantswho know how to use themand
who can provide other needed skills.
• The chance for persons who are not able to
carry food or water to a public shelter to share some
brought by the more provident occupants.
Disadvantages of the great majority of public
and other existing shelters available to large numbers
of people:
• The location of most of themin targeted areas.
• Poor protection against blast, fire and carbon
monoxide.
* Lack of water and means for storing it,
and lack of stocked food.
• No reliable air pumps, which are essential in
warm or hot weatherfor supplyingadequateventilat-
ing-cooling air to maintain endurable conditions in
fully occupied shelters-especially belowground.
• Uncertainties regarding the availability of
fallout meters and occupants who know how to use
them.
• No dependable lights, sanitary facilities, or
other life-support equipment, with few exceptions.
• The crowding together of large numbers of
people who are strangers to each other. Under
frightening conditions that mightcontinue for weeks,
the greater the number of people, the greater would
be the risks of the spread ofinfectiousdiseasesand of
hysteria, personality clashes, and the development of
other conflicts.
BELOWGROUND EXPEDIENT EARTH-
COVERED FALLOUT SHELTERS
(Appendix A details two designs of below-
ground shelters, three designs of aboveground
shelters, and one design that affords excellent
protection built either below or aboveground).
Advantages of belowground, earth-covered
expedient fallout shelters:
• They afford better protection than do above-
ground, earth-covered types.
• Less time, work, and materials are required to
build them than to build equally protective above-
ground designs.* If built sufficiently separated from houses and
flammable woods, they provide much better protection
against fire hazards than do shelters in buildings.
* If dug in stable earth, even types with unshored
earth walls give quite good blast protection up to
overpressure ranges of at least 5 psi - where most
homes and buildings would be destroyed by blast or
fire.
Disadvantages of belowgroundexpedient fallout
shelters:
* They are not practical in areas where the water
table or rock is very near the surface.
* It is impractical to build them in deep-frozen
ground.
* They are usually more crowded- and uncom-
fortable than improved basement shelters.
EXPEDIENT BLAST SHELTERS
Advantages of expedient blast shelters:
* Occupants of expedient blast shelters de-
scribed in Appendix D could survive uninjured in
extensive blast areas where fallout shelters would not
prevent death or injury.
