 needs, and also from an intensive study of the
serious civil defense preparations undertaken by other
countries. including Switzerland. Sweden, the USSR,
and China. He initiated and edited the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory translations of Soviet civil defense
handbooks and of a Chinese manual. and gained
additional knowledge from these new sources. Trips to
England, Europe, and Israel also expanded his infor-
mation on survival measures. which contributed to the
Nuclear War Survival Skills. However, the book
advocates principally those do-it-yourself instructions
that field tests have proved to be practical.
Eugene P. Wigner, Physicist. Nobel Laureate. and
the only surviving initiator of the Nuclear Age.
May. 1979Acknowledgments
Theauthortakesthisopportunitytothank
the following personsfortheirspecialcontri-
butions, withoutmany ofwhich itwouldhave
been impossible to have written this book:
L. Joe Deal,James L. Liverman, and W.W.
Schroebelfor the essential supportthey made
possible over the years, first by the U.S.
Atomic Energy Commission, next by the
Energy Research and DevelopmentAdminis-
tration, andthen bythe DepartmentofEnergy.
This support was the basis of the laboratory
work and field testing that produced most of
the survival instructions developed between
1964 and 1979, given in this book. Mr.
Schroebel also reviewed earlyandfinal drafts
and made anumber of improvements.
John A. Auxier, Ph.D.; health physicist,
who for years was Director of the Industrial
Safety and Applied Health Physics Division,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)-for
manuscript review and especially for check-
ing statements regarding the effects of radia-
tion on people.
Conrad V. Chester, Ph.D., chemical en-
gineer, civil defense researcher, developer of
improved defenses against exotic weapons
and unconventional attacks, nuclear strate-
gist, andcurrently Group Leader, Emergency
PlanningGroup, ORNL-foradvice andmany
contributions, startingwiththe initialorgani-
zation ofmaterial and continuingthrough all
the drafts of the original and this edition.
William K. Chipman, LLD, OfficeofCivil
Preparedness, Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency-for review in 1979 of the final
draft of the original ORNL edition.
George A. Cristy, M.S., who for many
years was a chemical engineer and civil
defense researcher at ORNL-for contribu-
tions to the planning of the original edition
and editing of early drafts.
Kay B. Franz, Ph.D., nutritionist, Asso-
ciate Professor, Food Science and Nutrition
Department, Brigham Young University-
for information and advice used extensively
in the Food chapter.
Samuel Glasstone, Ph.D., physical chem-
ist and the leading authority on the effects of
nuclearweapons-foroverallreview andcon-
structive recommendations, especially re-
gardingsimplifiedexplanationsofthe effects
of nuclear weapons.
Carsten M. Haaland, M.S., physicist and
civil defense researcher at ORNL-for scien-
tific advice and mathematical computations
of complex nuclear phenomena.
Robert H. Kupperman, Ph.D., physicist,
in 1979the ChiefScientist, U.S. Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency, Department of
State-for review of the final draft of the 1979
edition.
DavidB. Nelson, Ph.D.,electricalengineer
and mathematician, for years a civil defense
and thermonuclear energy researcher at
ORNL,anauthorityonelectromagneticpulse
(EMP) problems-formanuscriptreview and
contributions to sections on electromagnetic
pulse phenomena, fallout monitoring instru-
ments, and communications.
Lewis V. Spencer,Ph.D.,for manyyears a
physicistwiththeRadiationPhysicsDivision,
Center for Radiation Research, National
Bureau of Standards-for his calculations
and advice regarding needed improvements
in the design of blast shelters to assure
adequate protection of occupants against ex-
cessive exposure to initial nuclear radiation.
Edward Teller, Ph.D., nuclear physicist,
leading inventor of offensive and defensive
weapons, a strong supporter of civil defense
at OakRidge National Laboratory andworld-
wide-forcontributingtheForeword,original-
ly written for the American Security Council
1980 edition, and for his urging which moti-
vated the author to work on this 1987 edition.
Eugene P. Wigner, Ph.D.