 are more
laborious tooperate than are KAPs, thatare manually powered, pendulum-
like air pumps that conserve energy.60
A durable but laboriously heavy fan can be made in a few minutes using a
20 x 30-inch piece of I/,-inch plywood nailed to a single 46-inch-Iong, 1 x 2-
inch hoard. Or use a single round stick about 11"inches in diameter, flattened
on one side.
A fan with its blade made of two sheets of very heavy cardboard tied on
both sides of a 1 x 2-inch board is decidedly effective when dry. However,
typical cardboard will become soft and worthless in most crowded, long-
occupied, humid shelters.
To fan directionally, it is best to stand just outside and to one side of a
doorway. so that your body does not obstruct the air flow. Preferably stand
opposite and facing the open door, which should be secured open and
perpendicular to its doorway. Hold the fan like a golf club and swing it with
your arms extended. Then slowly count 1, 2 while you:
W Make the power stroke with the fan bladebroadside until the end of
the stroke, when you quickly turn it 90 degrees.
[i] Make the pendulum-like return stroke with the fan blade kept
edgewise ("feathered") to the air flow until the end, when you quickly turn it
90 degrees. preparatory to making the next power stroke.
To pump more air. block off the upper part of the doorway with cloth,
cardboard. plywood. etc., to prevent air from flowing back in the wrong
direction through the upper part of the doorway. See sketch on preceding
page.
Whenever practical, directionally fan the air in the same direction that
the air is naturally flowing through the shelter. More air usually can be
pumped through a shelter if the fan is used to force air out through the air-
exhaust opening. This reduces the air pressure inside the shelter and causes
fresh outdoor air to be "sucked" into the shelter through the air-intake
doorway, or through other large air-intake openings. Thus with one fan 1,000
cubic feet per minute can be pumped through a fully occupied shelter. This is
enough outdoor air - if it is properly distributed within the shelter - to
maintain tolerable conditions for weeks for 25 occupants during extremely
hot weather, and for up to about 300 occupants during cold weather.
To ventilate and cool a room having only one doorway and no other
opening, do not block off any part of the doorway. Ifair is fanned into such a
room through the lowerpart of its completelyopendoorway, thenairwillflow
back out of the room through the upper part of the doorway. However, this
pumps much less air than when a separate, large air-exhaust opening is
provided.
To increase the flow of outdoor air through a tunnel-shelter, several
fanners equallyspaced alongits length should each fan in the directionofthe
natural air flow. This procedure was first proved practical during a 1981
ventilation test that Cresson H. Kearny participated in with Chinese civil
defense officials in the port city of Dalien. In this test 5 fanners. each with a
fan of approximately the size illustrated, forced air from the outdoors
through a 395-footsection between two opened entrancesofa typical Chinese
tunnel-shelter. The air flow was increased from a natural flow of 290 cubic
feet per minute to 3,680cubic feet per minute. The 5excellent Chinese fans
each had a blade madeofa pieceof 3 mm (approx. Ysinch)plywood nailed toa
single board.
With many more pairs of Bedsheet Fanners working, enough air for at
least 10,000 occupants could be "sucked" intothis mine throughone of its 17
x 20-foot portals, fanned down a corridor to the far "dead end" of the mine,
then fanned through a cross corridor, and finally fanned back outthrough the
corridor that has the second truck-sized portal at its outer end.
A pair of pre-mechanization coal miners produced a directed airflow by
holding a piece of canvas vertically between them while they quickly walked
a short ways in the direction ofthe desired airflow; they walked back with the
canvas held horizontally between them. Then they repeated.
1. No installation is needed, thus saving working time and materials for
making habitable shelters hurriedly built or upgraded during a crisis.
2. 