. Wind
directions are undependable; an enemy's targeting can
be unexpected; weapons can miss. A prudent citizen.
no matter where he is,should try to build a shelter that
gives excellent protection against fallout radiation.
A major disadvantage of all types of risk-area
maps is the fact that poorly informed people often
misinterpret them and conclude that ifthey are outside
a mapped risk area, they are relatively safe from blast,
fire, and even deadly fallout dangers.
Another reason for not placing much re-
liance on risk-area maps like Fig. 4.2 is that
such unclassified maps available in 1986 are
based onthe largestattacks consideredpossible
a decade ago. In 1986the sizesofSovietwarheads
are much smaller, their numbers are much
larger, and their total megatonage and capa-
bility to produce fallout remain about the same
as 10 years ago.
The outdated attack scenario used in pro-
ducing Fig. 4.2 also involved the surface burst-
ing of multi-megaton warheads totaling 3,190
megatons on military targets, including over
2,000 megatons logically surfacebursted on our
five Minuteman missile fields. Such an attack
on our missile fields would produce about the
same amount of fallout as is shown in Fig. 4.2.
Today, however, heavy fallout from ourmissile
fields would extend somewhatshorterdistances
downwind, because of the lower heights of the
stabilized radioactive clouds from one-megaton
and smaller surface and near-surface bursts, as
compared to those of multi-megaton warheads
that would have been exploded 10 years ago, at a
time when a 20-megaton warhead was typical of
the Soviet nuclear ICBM arsenal.
In 1986 hundreds of targets besides those
indicated in Fig. 4.2 might be hit, but the total
area ofthe United States subjectedto lethal fall-
out probably would be lessthan is shown in Fig.
4.2. To maximize areas of destruction by blast
and fire, mosttargets in urban and/or industrial
areas would be attacked with air bursts, which
would produce little or no promptly lethal or
incapacitatingfallout - exceptperhaps in scat-
tered "hot spots" where rain-outs or snow-outs
could bring huge numbers of tiny, very radio-
active particles to earth within hours after the
air burstingoftoday'skiloton-range Sovietwar-
heads. And since most Americans live far away
from "hard" targets - especially far from mis-
sile silos. downwind from which extremely
heavy fallout is likely - most of us living in or
near high-risk areas probably would be en-
dangered primarilybyblastandfire, notfallout.
in the event of a Soviet attack.DO-IOOR
• > 20,000
/40°/_
/
30°
50°,_
I
/
·101-450 R
J_2~0
liz;451- 2500 R 112501 - 5000 R III5001- 10,000 R
70°
80°
~ , ..,....- -'
ORNL-DWG 78-20305R
.10,004 - 20,000 R
Fig. 4.2. Simplified,outdatedfallout patternsshowingtotal radiationdoses thatwould be receivedby persons
on the surface and in the open for the entire 14days following the surface bursting of 5050megatons on the targets
indicated, if the winds at all elevations blew continuously from the west at 25 mph.WHETHER TOEVACUATE
Let's assumethatRussiancitieswerebeing
evacuated, or that tactical nuclear weapons
were beginning to be used in what had been an
overseasconventionalwarinvolvingthe United
States. In such a worseningcrisis, mostAmeri-
cans could improve their survival chances by
getting out of the highest-risk and high-risk
areas.
U.S. capabilities for war-crisis evacuation
are poor and tending to worsen. Several years
ago, out of the approximately 3,100 evacuation
plans required nationwide, about 1,500had been
made, andthese involvedonly aboutonethirdof
Americans living in risk areas. By 1986 some
cities and states had abandonedtheirwar-crisis
evacuation plans; most still have plans that
would save millions if ordered in time during a
crisis lasting at least a few days and completed
beforetheattack. 