AL POSSESSIONS
Toothbrushes are not boiled or otherwise dis-
infected after being used. because we all develop con-
siderable resistance to our own infective organisms.
For the same reason. each individual should have his
own personal drinking cup. bowl. and spoon. They
should be cleaned as well as possible and kept covered
when not in use.
PREVENTION OF SKIN DISEASES
In crowded shelters. especially during hot
weather. skin diseases are likely to be a more serious
problem than is generally recognized. The impor-
tance of learning how to prevent skin diseases was
made apparent by one of the very few shelter-
occupancy tests to be conducted in the summer
without. air conditioning. This was a Navy test in
which 99 men lived for 12 days in an underground
shelter cooled only with outdoor summer air. I.' The
incidence of skin complaints was high. even though
medical treatment was available on a daily basis. The
total number of reports to sick call was 560: 34 of
these 99 healthy young men contracted heat rash and
23 had other skin complaints such as fungus
infections. However. these. sailors lived in an
inadequately ventilated shelter and did not cleanse
their sweaty skins or use the other methods listed
below for preventing skin troubles.
Even in shelters that are skillfully ventilated with
adequate outdoor air. skin diseases will be a serious
problem- especially in hot weather -unless special
hygiene measures are followed. Humid heat and heat
rash increase susceptibility to skin diseases. Most of
the following measures for preventing skin diseases
have been practiced by jungle natives for thousands
of years.
• Wash off sweat and dead skin. (When it is hot
and humid. dead skin is continuously rubbing and
flaking off and starting to decay.) Many jungle
natives rinse their bodies several times a day. Bathing
several times a day with soap is harmful in humid
heat; the rapid loss of normal skin oils is one of the
causes of skin diseases..Your skin can be kept fairlyclean by rinsing offeach day with just a cup ofwater,
while rubbing gently with a very small cloth. A6-inch
square of bedsheet cloth serves well. So that you can
dispose of the dirty water afterwards, wash yourself
while standing on a piece of plastic with itsedges held
up slightly. (Place sticks or narrow boards under the
edges.) Useabout two-thirds of the precious waterfor
the first rinse, starting from the face down and gently
rubbing neck, armpits, stomach, groin, buttocks, and
feet with a washcloth. Then use the remaining water
to rinse off again, using bare fingers. Ifboiling water
is available, sterilize washcloths every day by boiling
them for a few minutes.
• Sleep as cool and bare as practical, to dry the
maximum skin area.
• If practical. sit and sleep only where other
members of your family do and avoid use of bedding
by more than one family.
• Avoid infection from toilet seats by disinfecting
with a strong chlorine solution and then rinsing, by
covering with paper, or by not sitting down.
• Wash or disinfect clothing as often as practical,
especially underwear and socks. Disinfecting cloth-
ing, not laundering it, is the most important health
objective under difficult shelter conditions. Dipping
clothing into boiling water disinfects it. Unless plenty
of water is available for rinsing, do not disinfect
clothing by putting it in a chlorine bleach solution.
• Wear shoes or sandals when walking about, to
prevent fungus infections of the feet.
RESPIRATORY DISEASES
The spread of respiratory and other diseases
transmitted by coughing and sneezing would be
difficult to control in long-occupied shelters.
Adequate ventilation would help in disease preven-
tion. In small shelters, it would be better if persons
who are sneezing or coughing could stay near the
opening being used for air exhaust. In large shelters
with many occupants, the risk of one or moreofthem
having a disease that iseasily spread obviously willbe
higher than in a small shelter.Chapter 13
Surviving Without Doctors
A TEMPORARY RETURN TO SELF-HELP
Most doctors, hospital facilities, and medical
supplies are located in cities. An all-out attack would
destroy most of these modern blessings. Even if
medical assistance were nearby, only a few of the
survivors confined to shelters inareas of heavy fallout
would be able to get needed medicines or the help ofa
doctor. 