
warm enough to sleep without blankets by skillfully
using ordinary indoor clothing plus paper and pieces
of cloth to insulate their whole bodies. The girls
pictured in Fig. 15.3 slept without a blanket in a
frozen Door-Covered Trench Shelter while the night
temperature outdoors dropped to 10°F. The shelter's
ventilation openings were adjusted so that the inside
temperature remained a few degrees below freezing,
to prevent frozen earth from melting into icy mud.
These girls had insulated themselves well. First, they
covered their cotton shirts and pants with IO
thicknesses of newspaper wrapped around their
bodies and tied withstrips of cloth.Thenaroundeach
arm and leg they wrapped and tied 8 sheets of
newspaper, thus insulating theirlimbs with at least 16
Fig. 15.3. Girls wearing expedient clothing are
prepared for sleeping in the freezing-cold trench
shelter.thicknesses. As an outercoveringovertheir legs,they
wrapped wide strips torn from a bedsheet. Their
expedient foot coverings were ofthe type described in
a following paragraph. Their heads and necks were
insulated with towels covered with brown paperbags.
Old cotton raincoats allowed water vapor to pass
through and helped hold in place the insulating
newspapers, which extended to cover the girls' bare
hands.
The girls slept on newspapers spread about an
inch thick over the gravel floor of the trench. When
sleeping on cold or frozen ground, it is best to place
newspapers or other insulation on top of a layer of
small limb-tips or brush, so that drying air can
circulate under the bedding. A sheet of plastic under
bedding will keep it from being dampened by a wet
floor but will not prevent it from being dampened
after a few days by condensed water vapor from the
sleeper's body.
Newspaper and other paper through which
water vapor can pass are such good windbreaker
materials that they can be used under any loose-
fitting outer garment-even one through which air
can pass quite readily. They also provide good
insulation. Figure 15.4 shows the author coming out
of an icy shelter at sunup. Many thicknesses of
newspaper covered my body and arms and extended
like cuffs from my sleeves. A porous cotton bathrobe
covered the newspapers and helped hold them in
place. Because so little heat was lost through this
clothing, plenty of warm blood continued to flow to
my bare hands, ridding my body of excess heat by
radiation.
IMPROVISED WINTER FOOTWEAR
Cold-weather footwear that is warmer than all
but the best-insulated winterbootscan be improvised
readily. The trick is learning how to tie the several
insulating layers securely in place, so that you could
hike for miles in the snow if necessary.
For use in dry snow, first tie a porous insulating
layer-such as two bath towels or 10 big sheets of
newspaper-over each shoe. If you have no low-
heeled shoes, make a paper sole by folding 3 large
newspaper sheets to make a sole that has 72
thicknesses of paper. Then proceed in the following
manner:
I. Place your foot and the sole on 10 newspaper
sheets, as pictured in Fig. 15.5.
Fig. 15.4. The author emerges after a night's sleep in freezing-cold temperatures inside a Car-Over-Trench
Shelter. Expedient clothing, primarily newspaper insulation, kept him warm without a blanket.Fig. 15.5..Insulating a foot with a folded newspaper sole and 10 sheets of newspaper.
2. Fold all the sheets over the top of your foot while
keeping the sole in the proper place, as indicated in
Fig. 15.5.
3. Use a strip of cloth about 3 inches wide and 5feet
long to tie the papers in front of your ankle with a
single overhand knot (half ofasquare knot). With
the same strip, tie another single overhand knot
over the tendon behind the ankle. Finally, tie a
bow knot in front of the ankle.
4. Cover the insulating layer with a tough fabric,
. such as canvas or burlap sack material; secure
with a second strip of cloth and tie as described
above.
If the snow is wet, place a piece of strong plastic
film or coated fabric outside the insulating layer,
after securing it with the first strip ofcloth. 