 securely so that their
outer sides are exactly 3 ft apart, by driving two
pairs of stakes into the ground so that they just
touch the outsides of the two long poles. Each of
the four stakes should be located about one foot
from the end of a pole. To keep the 8-ft poles
from being rotated duringthe next step, nail two
boards or small poles across them perpen-
dicularly, as temporary braces, about 4 ft apart.
Then with an ax or hatchet, slightly flatten
the inner sides of the two poles at the spots where
the ends of the 4 cross-brace poles will be nailed.
Next, saw each cross-brace pole to the length
required to fit snugly into its place. Finally,
toenail each cross-brace pole in place, preferably
with two large nails in each end.
15. If more than 5 persons are to be sheltered, use 3
column-posts for 6 to 9 persons, and 4 column-
posts for 10 to 14 persons.
16. For each additional person beyond 5, make the
ridgepole and the footing log each I foot longer
than shown in Fig. A.5.17. After notching the footing log (see drawing),
place it in a trench dug deep enough so that the
bottoms of its notches are about 4 inches below
the surface of the ground.
18. Carefully dig the 4-in.-deep, V-shaped, straight
trenches in which the lower ends of the 9-ft wall
poles will rest. Dig each of these two parallel
trenches 7 ft. 3 in. from the center line of the
footing log.
19. Carefully notch a "V" only about l/rin. deep in
the top of each of the two outer column-posts.
Then saw off the other ends so that each is 4 ft.
3 in. long. (When they are placed on the notched
footing log and the ridgepole is placed on them,
the upper side of the ridgepole will be about 4 ft
4 in. above the ground.)
20. Place the two outer column-posts in their
notches in the footing log, and secure the base of
each column-postagainst sideways movement by-
placing two small-diameter, 4-ft horizontal poles
just below the ground level on both sides, as
illustrated. Then temporarily place and bracethe
ridgepole in position.
21. For shelters sized for more than 5 occupants,
make and place the inner column-post, or posts.
To avoid cutting a "V"<notched column-post too
short, first carefully "V'vnotch each remaining
column-post, cut it about I in. too long, and trim
it off to fit in its final position under the
ridgepole.
22. If nails at least 4 in. long are available, nail
sloping cross-braces to the inner sides of the
column-posts. If nails are not available, notch
slightly bowed cross-braces and the column-post
as illustrated; then lash or wire them in position.
(Strips of ordinary bedsheets, torn about a foot
wide and twisted together slightly, can be made
to serve as lashing "rope.") To hold the tops of
the column-posts securely against the upperends
of the cross-braces, a tightened "rope"loop that
encircles the tops of the column-posts can be
used.
23. Next put four of the larger-diameter, 9-ft roof-
poles in position, with the outsides of the
outermost two roof poles each only about I in.
from an end of the ridge pole.
24. Place the rest of the 9-ft roof-poles in position,
making sure that all their small ends are
uppermost, and that they are pressed together
and overlap on the ridgepole at least as far as
illustrated. Pack earth between their lower ends.
If the earth is clay, put small spacers of wood
between the ends.
25. At each end of the shelter room, build extra
shelter space and an entryway. Firstposition two
14-ft poles with their upper ends resting on the
outermost wall poles. Study Fig. A.5. Place the
two 14-ft poles 20 in. apart, parallel, and equally
distant from the centerline of the ridgepole. Nail
four 20-in.-Iong spacer-poles between each pair
of 14-ft poles, as illustrated. To make sure that
the upperends do not move beforeearth pressure
holds them in place, tie the upperends of the 14-ft
poles together. 