Ms
would be fired from their silos in Europe and Asia.
L.S. surveillance systems would detect launchings
and transmit warnings within a. very few minutes.
Since some enemy submarines would be only a few
hundred miles from their targets, some SLBMs
would explode on American targets about 15 or 20
minutes before the first ICBMs would hit.
Some SLBMs would strike civilian airport
runways that are at least 7000 ft long. This is the
minimum length required by B-52s; there were 210
such runways in the U.S. in 1977. During a crisis, big
bombers would be dispersed to many of these long
runways. and enemy SLBMs would be likely to target
and hit these runways in an effort to destroy the
maximum number of bombers.
Today most Soviet SLBMs have warheads
between 100 kilotons and one megaton. See
Jane s Weapon Systems, 1987-88. Within 10 to 15
minutes of the beginning of an attack, runways
7000 feet or longer are likely to be hit by
airbursts, to destroy U.S. aircraft and airport
facilities. Later cratering explosions may be
used to destroy surviving long runways, or at
least to produce local fallout soheavy that they
could not beusedfor severaldaysfor re-arming
and re-fueling our bombers. Therefore, homes
within about 4 miles of a runway at least 7000 ft long
are likely to be destroyed before residents receive
warning or have time to reach blast shelters away from
their homes. Homes six miles away could be lightly
damaged bysuch a warhead, with the blast wave from
a l-megaton explosion arriving about 22 seconds
after the warning light. Some windows would be
broken40 milesaway. But the large majority ofcitizens
would not be injured by these early SLBM attacks.
These explosions would be life-saving "take cover"
warningsto most Americans, ifthey have been properly
informed.
Sudden powerand communicationsfailurescaused
by the electromagnetic pulse (EMP) effects of nuclear
explosions also could serve as attack warnings in
extensive areas. An EMP is an intense burst of radio-
frequency radiation generated by a nuclear explosion.
The strong, quick-rising surges of electric current
induced by EMP in power transmission lines and long
antennas could burn out most unprotected electrical
and electronic equipment. Alsolikelytobedamaged
or destroyed would be unprotected computers.
The solid state electrical components of some
aircraft and of some motors of modern autos,
trucks, and tractors may be put out of commis-
sion. Metalbodiesgivesomeprotection, whereas
plastic bodies give little.
The usual means of protectingelectrical equipment
against surges of current produced by lightning are
generally ineffective against EM P. The protective
measures are known, but to date all too few civilian
installations have been protected against EMP effects.
Three or four nuclear weapons skillfully spaced and
detonated at high altitudes over the United States
would produce EMPeffects that might knock out most
public power, most radioand TV broadcastingstations
lacking special protection against these effects, and
most radios connected to long antennas. Nuclear
explosions on or near the ground may produce dam-
aging EMP effects over areas somewhat larger than
those in which such equipmentand buildings would be
damaged by the blast effects.
HOW TO RESPOND TO UNEXPECTED
ATTACK WARNINGS
Although a Pearl-Harbor-type of attack is
unlikely; citizens should be prepared to respond
effectively to unexpected warnings.
These warnings include:
• Extremely bright lights-more light than has
been seen before. The dazzling. bright lights of the
first SLBM explosions on targets in many parts of the
United States would beseen by most Americans. One
should not look to determine the source of light and
heat, because there is danger of the viewer's eyes
being damaged by the heat and light from a large
explosion at distances as far as a hundred miles away,
in clear weather. Look down and away from the
probable source, and quickly get behind anything
that will shield you from most of the thermal pulse's
burning heat and intense light. A thermal pulse
delivers its heat and light for several seconds-for
more than II seconds ifit isfrom a I-megaton surface
burst and for approximately 44 seconds if from a 20-
megaton surface burst.
If you are at home when you see the amazingly
bright light, run out of rooms with windows. 