 at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, one of the
first researchers I recruited was Cresson H. Kearny.
Most of his life has been preparation, unplanned and
planned, for writing this guide to help people unfamiliar
with the effects of nuclear weapons improve their
chances of surviving a nuclear attack. During the past
15years he has done an unequaled amount of practical
field work on basic survival problems, without always
conforming to the changing civil defense doctrine.
After I returned to my professional duties at
Princeton in 1966, the civil defense effort at Oak Ridge
:\ational Laboratory was first headed by James C.
Bresee. and is nowheaded by Conrad V. Chester. Both
have wholeheartedly supported Kearny's down-to-
earth research. and Chester was not only a co-
developer of several of the survival items described in
this book, but also participated in the planning of the
experiments testing them.
Kearny's concern with nuclear war dangers began
while he was studying for his degree in civil engineering
at Princeton - he graduated summa cum laude in
1937. His Princeton studies had already acquainted
him with the magnitude of an explosion in which
nuclear energy is liberated, then only a theoretical
possibility. After winning a Rhodes Scholarship,
Kearny earned two degrees in geology at Oxford. Still
before the outbreak of World War II. he observed the
effective preparations made in England to reduce the
effects of aerial attacks. He had a deep aversion to
dictatorships, whetherfrom the right or left, and during
the \1 unich crisis he acted as a courier for an un-
derground group helping anti-Nazis escape from
Czechoslovakia.
Following graduation from Oxford, Kearny did
geological exploration work in the Andes of Peru and
in the jungles of Venezuela. He has traveled also in
Mexico, China. and the Philippines.
A year before Pearl Harbor, realizing that the
United States would soon be at war and that ourjungle
troops should have at least as good personalequipment.
food, and individual medical suppliesas do exploration
geologists. he quit his job with the Standard Oil
Company of Venezuela. returned to the United States,
and went on active duty as an infantry reserve lieutenant.
Kearny was soon assigned to Panama as the Jungle
Experiment Officer of the Panama Mobile Force. In
that capacity he was able to improve orinvent, and then
thoroughly jungle-test, much of the specialized equip-
ment and rations used by our jungle infantrymen in
World War II. Forthis work he was promoted to major
and awarded the Legion of Merit.
To take his chances in combat, in 1944 the author
volunteered for duty with the Office of Strategic
Services. As a demolition specialist helping to limit the
Japanese invasion then driving into the wintry moun-
tains of southern China, he saw mass starvation and
death first hand. Theexperiencesgained in this capacity
also resulted in an increased understanding of both the
physical and emotional problems of people whose
country is under attack.
Worry about the increasing dangers of nuclear
war and America's lack of civil defense caused the
author in 1961 to consult Herman Kahn. a leading
nuclear strategist. Kahn, who was at that time forming
a nonprofit war-research organization, the Hudson
Institute, offered him work as a research analyst. Two
years of civil defense research in this"think tank"made
the author much more knowledgeable of survival
problems.
In 1964 he joined the Oak Ridge civil defense
project and since then Oak Ridge has been Kearny's
base of operations, except for two years during the
height of the Vietnam war. For his Vietnam work on
combat equipment, and also for his contributions to
preparations for improvingsurvivability in the event of
a nuclear war, he received the Army's Decoration for
Distinguished Civilian Service in 1972.
This book draws extensively on Kearny's under-
standing of the problems of civil defense acquired as a
result of his own field testing of shelters and other
survival needs, and also from an intensive study of the
serious civil defense preparations undertaken by other
countries. including Switzerland. Sweden, the USSR,
and China. He initiated and edited the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory translations of Soviet civil defense
handbooks and of a Chinese manual. and gained
additional knowledge from these new sources. Trips to
England, Europe, and Israel also expanded his infor-
mation on survival measures. which contributed to the
Nuclear War Survival Skills. 