 coathanger wire taped to a 'h-inch
flexible hose and a rubber tube. Shown on the right is
a tube closed with a rubber band to stop a siphoned
flow of water.
7. Exhale, straighten the tube, and suck again,
repeating until you feela good flow of water into your
.mouth while stillsucking. Shut off the flow by bending
the tube double before taking it out of your mouth.
8. Quickly lower the end of the tube (which is
now full of water) and place the closed end in a
container on the shelter floor. Finally, open the end
to start the siphoned flow.
9. When you have siphoned enough water, stop
the flow by bending the tube double. Keep it closed in
the doubled-over, air-tight position with a strong
rubber band or string, as shown in Fig. 8.8. To prevent
loss of water by accidental siphoning, suspend the end
ofthe tube a couple of inches higher than the surface of
the water in the storage pit outside and close to where
the tube comes into the shelter. (Despite precautions,
air may accumulate in the highest part of the tube,
blocking a siphoned flow and making it necessary to
re-start the siphoning by repeating the sucking.)
the storage pit cannot be accidentally pulled out of
position.
5. To start the flow of water into the shelter,
hold the free end of the tubeat about the height of the
surface of the water in the storage pit, while pulling
gently on the tube so that the part in the shelter is
practically straight. Exhale as much breath as you
can, then place the end of the tube inyourmouth, and
suck hard and long. (The longer the tube or hose and
the larger its diameter, the more times you will have
to suck to start the flow of water.)
6. Without taking the tube out of your mouth,
shut it off airtight by bending it double near the end.
DISINFECTING WATER
Water-borne diseases probably would kill more
survivors of a nuclear attack than would fallout-
contaminated water. Before an attack, if water from a
municipal source isstored in expedient containers that
could be unclean, it should be disinfected. For long
storage, it is best to disinfect all water, since even a few
organisms may multiply rapidly and givestored watera
bad taste or odor. Properly disinfected water remains
safe for many years if stored in thick plastic or glass
containers sealed airtight. For multi-year storage do
not use thin plastic containers, such as milkjugs, which
in time often develop leaks.
Any household bleach solution, such as Clorox,
that contains sodium hypochlorite as its only activeingredient may be used as a source of chlorine for
disinfecting. The amount of sodium hypochlorite,
usually 5.25%,isprinted on the label. (In recentyears,
perhaps as a precaution against drinking undiluted
chlorine bleach solution, some household bleach
containers show a warningsuch as"Not For Personal
Use." This warning can be safely disregarded if the
label states that the bleach contains only sodium
hypochlorite as its active ingredient, and if only the
small quantities specified in these and other instruc-
tions are used to disinfect water.) Add I scant
teaspoonful to each I0gallons of clearwater, and stir.
Add 2 scant teaspoonfuls if the water is muddy or
colored. Wait at least 30 minutes before drinking, to
allow enough time for the chlorine to kill all the
microorganisms." Properly disinfected water should
have a slight chlorine odor.
To disinfect small quantities of water, put 2
drops of household bleach containing 5.25%sodium
hypochlorite in each quart ofclearwater. Use4drops
if the water is muddy or colored.204 Ifa dropper is not
available, use a spoon and a square-ended strip of
paper or thin cloth about 1/4inch wide by 2 inches
long. Put the strip in the spoon with an end hanging
down about 1/2 inch beyond the end of the spoon.
Then when bleach is placed in the spoon and the
spoon iscarefully tipped, drops the sizeof thosefrom
a medicine dropper will drip off the end of the strip.
As a second choice, 2%tincture of iodine can be
used. 