a convenient grounding-point. Park your car as near
to your shelter as practical, so that after fallout
has decayed sufficiently you may be able to use
the car radio to get distant stations that are still
broadcasting.
• Prevent possible damage to a radio from ex-
treme dampness (which may result from long
occupancy of some belowground shelters) by keep-
ing it sealed in a clear plastic bag large enough so
the radio can be operated while inside. An additional
precaution is to keep a plastic-covered radio in an
air-tight. container with some anhydrite made from
wallboard gypsum, as described in Appendix C.
• Conserve batteries, because after an attack you
may not be able to get replacements for months.
Listen only periodically, to the stations you find give
the most useful information. The batteries of
transistor radios will last up to twice as long if the
radios are played at reduced volume.Chapter 4
Evacuation
CHANGED EVACUATION REQUIREMENTS
The most threatening Soviet nuclear war-
heads in the mid-1970s were multi-megaton,
such as single warheads of approximately 20
megatons carried by each of over 250 SS-18s.
About half of these huge Russian warheads
would have hit within a quarterof a mile orless
of their intended targets - close enough to
destroy a missile in its hardened silo. Today's
improved Russian warheadshave a 50-50 proba-
bility of hittingwithin a few hundredfeetof their
aiming points. With such accuracy, multi-
megaton warheads are not needed to destroy
very hard targets, especially missiles in their
blast-protective silos.
Soviet strategy continues to stress the de-
struction of military targets, in order to mini-
mize Russian losses from retaliatory strikes.
This logical, long-establishedSovietstrategy is
emphasized in numerous authoritative Russian
books, including the three editions of Soviet
Military Strategy, by Marshall ofthe Soviet Union
V. D: Sokolovskiy.
One result of this logical strategy has been
the replacement of huge Soviet warheads by
numerous, much smaller, much more accurate
warheads. In 1990 almost all large missiles
have several Multiple Independently-targetted
Reentry Vehicles (MIRVed) warheads. Soviet
warheads - especially the 10 warheads of
500 kilotons each carried by most SS-18s -
could destroy almost all important U.S. fixed
military installations, and also almost all U.S.
commandandcontrolfacilities, airportrunways
longer than 7,000 feet, major seaports, and the
factories and refineries that are the basis of our
military power. (Although an all-out Soviet
attack could destroy almost all missile silos
and missiles in them, a first-strike attack is
deterred in partbythe possibilitythat mostU.S.
missiles in silos would be launched on warning
and would be in space, on their trajectories
toward Russian targets, beforeSovietwarheads
could reach their silos.)
How should your plans either to evacuate
during a worsening crisis, or to remain in your
home area, be influenced by the dramatic
changes inthe Soviet nuclear arsenal? Some of
these changes are indicated by Fig. 4.1, that
incorporates information on the dimensions of
the stabilized clouds of one megaton and 200
,kiloton explosions, from reference 6, The Effects
ofNuclear Weapons, 1977,and similarinformation
on a 20-megaton cloud derived from a graph on
page 20 of The Effects on the Atmosphere ofa Major
Nuclear Exchange, by the Committee on the At-
mospheric Effects of Nuclear Explosions, Na-
tional Research Council, National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C. 1985. (This NRC graph
is based on Ballistic Missile Organization 83-5
Part 1, datedzs September 1983, a report that is
not generally available.)
The air bursting of one of the probably few
20-megaton warheads carried by Soviet ICBMs
would destroy typical American homes up to
about 16milesfrom groundzero. Incontrast, the
air bursting of an approximately t-megaton
warhead - one ofthe large warheads in today's
Soviet arsenal - would destroy most homes
within a roughly circular area having a radius
of "only" about 5 miles. 