150 feet and dug their trench near the edge of the
cornfield.
The father and the oldest son did most of the
work of making the shelter. The mother and second
son had health problems; the two youngest children
were not accustomed to work.
The family followed an earlier version of the
plans and instructions given in Appendix A for
building a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. Because the
earth was firm and stable, the trenches were dugwith
vertical walls. If the earth had been less stable, it
would have been necessary to slope the walls-
increasing the width at the top of the main trench
from 3\/2 to 5 feet.
Before placing the roof poles, the workers
assured themselves a more comfortable shelter by
covering the trench walls. They had brought a large
number of the plastic garbage bags required in their
home community and split some bags open to make
wall coverings. Bed sheets or other cloth could have
been used.
The room of this 6-person shelter was 31/2 feet
wide, 41/2 feet high, and 161/2 feet long. A small stand-
up hole was dug at one end, so each tall occupant
could stand up and stretch several times a day.
The trenches for entry and emergency exit were
dug only 22 inches wide, to minimize radiation
entering the shelter through these openings. One wall
of these two narrow trenches was an extension of the
Fig. 5.1. Placing 9-foot poles for the roof of a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter.room wall shown on the right in Fig. 5.1. The family
sat and slept along the left wall, to be better shielded
from radiation coming through the openings.
This shelter was designed so that its main trench
could be enlarged to make a much more livable room
without disturbing its completed roof. For this
reason, the 9-foot roofing poles were placed off-
center, with the two extra feet resting on the ground
to the right of the main room.
Whenever practical, expedient shelters should
be built so that they can be readily enlarged to make
semi-permanent livingquarters. Afterit becomessafe
to emerge for limited periods, occupants could sleep
and spend much of their waking time in such a
rainproof dugout that affords excellent protection
against continuing radiation. In cold weather, living
in a dugout like this is more comfortable than living
in a tent or shack. Afterthe fallout radiation dose rate
outdoors has decayed to lessthan about 2R per hour,
the small vertical entry could be enlarged arid
converted to a steeply inclined stairway.
The importance of giving inexperienced shelter
builders detailed instructions is illustrated by the
unnecessary work done by the young women shown
in Fig. 5.2. They had agreed to try to build a Pole-
Covered Trench. Shelter, working unassisted and
using only hand tools. Because the summer sun in
Utah was hot, they selected a shady site under a large
tree. The briefinstructions they received included no
advice on the selection of a building site. Cuttingand
digging out the numerous roots was very difficult for
them and required several of the 22 hours they spent
actually working.
Another disadvantage of making a shelterunder
trees is that more of the gamma rays from fallout
particles on the leaves and branches would reach and
penetrate the shelter than if these same particles were
on the ground. Many gamma rays from fallout
particles on the ground would be scattered or
absorbed by striking rocks, clods of earth, tree
trunks, or houses before reaching a belowground
shelter.
Fig. 5.2. Two non-athletic college girls who completed a 4-person Pole-Covered Trench Shelter in 351/2
hours, despite tree roots.TYPES OF SHIELDING
Shelters provide protection against radiation by
utilizing two types of shielding: barriershielding and
geometry shielding.
• Barrier shielding is shown by Fig. 5.3, a
simplified illustration. (Ina realfallout area,amanin
an open trench would have fallout particles all over
and around him.) The 3-foot thickness of earth
shown (or a 2-foot thickness ofconcrete) willprovide
an effective barrier, attenuating (absorbing) about
99.9% of all gamma rays from fallout. (In the
illustration, only a single fallout particle 3 feet from
the edge of the trench is considered.) Only one
gamma ray oui of 1000could penetrate the 3 feet of
earth shown and strike the person in the trench. 