IRS OF 4".4" SUPPORTS
39"
----"''---------
NOTCHED
Fig. 17.4. Seat with Overhead BunkPropor-
tionedfor a ShelterRoomwith a 7-Ft. orHigher
Ceiling. A seat with a backrest should be 24
inches wide.
Fig. 17.5. Backrests of Bedsheet Cloth and
2-Inch-Thick Pads Make Sitting and Sleeping
Comfortable.
..J
..J
;prudent to count on stored supplies making
some bunks unusable, and to realize that in a
desperate crisis it might be hard to refuse
shelter to an unprepared good neighbor. Note
that with four persons seated on a 6.5-foot-Iong
seat and one person on the overhead bunk, five
personscan be quitecomfortablyaccommodated
on 25 square feet offloorspace, includingplenty
of room for the sitters' legs.
To store the most supplies in a shelter, you
should install shelves afteryou knowthe heights
of the itemsto be stored. Oftenthe space between
an overhead bunk and the ceiling can best be
used by making easily removeable additional
shelves.
WATER
• Water needs: Even most well-maintained
sheltersdo not haveenough waterfor prolonged
occupancy. A permanentsheltershould provide
each occupant with at least 30 gallons of safe
water - enough for an austere month, exceptin
very hot weather.
• Contafners: The most practical water con-
tainer for shelter storage is a 5-gallon rigid
plastic watercan with a handle, a largediameter
opening for quick filling and emptying, and a
small spout for pouring small quantities. A 5-
gallon watercan ofthis type sells for about$5 in
discount stores.
The plastic bottles that household chlorine
bleach is sold in also are good for multi-year
storage of drinking water, as are glass jugs.
Plastic milk jugs are not satisfactory, because
after a few years they often become brittle and
crack.
Some shelter owners do not realize that,
although a sheltercan bekeptdry in peacetime,
except in the arid Westits airis likelyto become
extremely humid after a few days of crowded
occupancy. Very humid air soon softens and
weakens cardboard containers of food and
flexible water bags.
• Disinfectingfor multi-yearstorage: To store
safe water and keep it safe for years, first
disinfect the container by rinsing it with a
strong solution ofchlorine bleach. Then rinse it
with safe water before filling it with the clear,
safe waterto be stored. Next, disinfectby adding
household bleach that contains 5.25% sodium
hypochlorite as its only active ingredient, in the
quantities specified in this book's Waterchapter
for disinfecting muddy or cloudy water. To 5
gallons, add 1scantteaspoon of bleach. Finally,
to prevent possible entry of air contaming
infective organisms through faulty closures,
seal the container's closures with duct tape.
• Making efficient use of storage space: A 5-
gallon rigid plastic water container typically
measures 7 x 12 x 21 inches, including the
heightof itsspout.Nine such5-galloncontainers
can be placed on a 2 x 3-footfloor area. Twenty-
seven 5-gallon containers, holding 135 gallons
ofwater, can be stored on and over6 square feet
offloor ifyou make a waterstorage stand24 x 42
x 48 inches high, built quite like the seat with
overhead bunk described in the Seats/Bunks/
Shelves section of this chapter. This easily
moveable storage stand should have two ply-
wood shelves, one 24 inches and the other 48
inches from the floor.
• Using filled containers for shielding: Filled
5-gallon watercontainerscanbemovedquickly
to provide additional shielding where needed to
increase the protection factor of all or part of a
shelter. For example, near the inner door of the
shelter illustrated by Figs. 17.1 and 17.2 the
protection factor is lessthan 1000. Butifenough
filled water containers are placed so as to cover
the door with almost the equivalent of an 18-
inch-thick "wall" of shielding water, the PF of
the partofthe shelter room nearthe doorcan be
raised to about PF 1000.
