 cord while
makingtheloops. Then afterthe plywood sand-
support is positioned in the bottom of the exit,
the exit can be filled by pouring dry sand
through the plug-hold in the steel lid. Finally,
the plug-holeshould be closed so that it cannot
be opened, and then made waterproof. To make
doubly sure that the lid will not rust, paint it
with a cement paint, and then with whatever
color outdoor paint you want.
A shelter occupant can cut out the nylon
cloth covering the hole in the sand-support,
remove all sand and the plywood sand-support
from this exit, cutthe four tightenednylon-cord
multipleloopsholdingdown thelid,pushoffthe
lid, and then climb up and step outside - all in
less than 5minutes, evenifdamp sandhas been
used to fill the exit. (To make removal of the
sand more difficult, in his tests the author used
damp sand that does not flow freely and makes
it necessary to loosen it repeatedly, with one's
hand and arm thrust up through the 8-inch hole
in the plywood sand-support.)
In a well designed blast shelter this sand-
filled emergency exit will provide excellent
protection againstsevereblast. Blasttests have
proved that a 1/8-inch steel lid (the equivalent
of a blast door) the size of this exit's lid will
withstandblasteffectsofatleast50 psi. Further-
more, sand arching will transfer blast loadings
onthe sandoutwardfrom the slightlydownward
deflecting plywood sand-support to its edges,
andthencetothe supportingreinforcedconcreterim or ledge around the 23 x 23-inch hole in the
shelter's roof slab. (See Fig. 17.2.)
A small shelter with an emergency exit
near its far end has additional advantages: It
can be supplied with adequate natural ven-
tilation most of the time, with easy forced
ventilation by a KAP when forced ventilation is
needed, and with daylight illumination. Means
for attaining these advantages are described in
Appendix F. .
ADEQUATE STORAGE SPACE
FOR ESSENTIALS
As will be shown in the following sections
of this chapter, about 20 square feet of shelter
floor area per family member is needed for
shelter furnishings and to store adequate water
for a month, a year's supply of compact dry
foods, cooking and sanitary equipment, blan-
kets, tools, and other post-attack essentials.
Twenty square feet per family member also
provides enough space per person to store
winter clothing and footwear, camping equip-
ment, and foods normally kept on hand and
rotated as consumed in the course of ordinary
family living. Additional space is needed if you
plan to use your shelter as a workshop, or as a
fallout shelter to save a few ofyour unprepared
friends without endangering your own family.
SEATS/BUNKS/SHELVES
Seats and overhead bunks built like those
specified in Fig. 17.4 and pictured in Fig. 17.5
enable more shelter occupants to sit and sleep
more comfortably in -Iess space than when
using any other shelter furnishings known to
the author. Note that the seat has an adjustable
backrest. This backrest is similar to the fine-
mesh nylon fishnet backrests tested in a proto-
type of an expensive blast shelterdesigned and
furnished at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Shelter habitability tests have proved the
need for backrests. Even some young German
soldiers had painfully sore backs after sitting
on ordinary benches during a 2-week shelter
occupancy test.
Backrests should be installed in peacetime
and kept ready for crisis use, rolled up against
their upper attachments and covered. Then
easily removeable storage shelves, if needed,
can be installed between benches and overhead
bunks.
To sitorsleepcomfortably,pullthebedsheet
forward and then sit on about the outer foot of
the 2-foot-wide seat.
Although this 5-occupant shelter is illus-
trated with a bunk for each family member, it is
39" BETWEEN PAIRS OF 4".4" SUPPORTS
39"
----"''---------
NOTCHED
Fig. 17.4. Seat with Overhead BunkPropor-
tionedfor a ShelterRoomwith a 7-Ft. orHigher
Ceiling. A seat with a backrest should be 24
inches wide.
Fig. 17.5. Backrests of Bedsheet Cloth and
2-Inch-Thick Pads Make Sitting and Sleeping
Comfortable.
