. If
specialfiredoorgasketsarenotavailable,rubber
weatherstripping will serve. To lessen the risk
of carbon monoxide being pumped into the
shelter if the house burns and air must be
pumped into the shelter while the fire still is
smoldering, the air-intake and pump should be
at the far end ofthe shelter, and the air-exhaust
.pipe and emergency exit should be near the
passageway from the house.
Be sure to seal electrical conduits leading
from a basementto a connectedshelter,sothatif
the house burns carbon monoxide can not flow
throughtheconduits intotheshelterwhenfresh
outdoorairisnotbeingpumpedintothe shelter.
The author, while conducting ventilation and
habitability tests of an earth-covered blast
shelterconnected through a tunnel to a house's
basement,observedairflowingoutthrough un-
sealed conduits, the reverse of such a possible
life-endangeringflowof carbonmonoxide.When
the shelter was being maintained at a slight
overpressurebycrankingitsblowerto pumpin
outdoor air, a little air flowed through the un-
sealed conduit into the basement.
For ways to minimize carbon monoxide
dangersarisingfromcooking,heating,lighting,
and smoking, see following sections in this
chapter.
Rememberthat air contaminated with only
0.16% carbon monoxide can kill you in 2 to 3
hours, and 0.04% carbon monoxide causes
frontal headaches and nausea in 2 to 3 hours.
The Navy sets its safe allowable carbon mon-
oxide concentration in air at 0.01%. (Shelter
HabitabilityStudies- TheEffectofOxygen Depletion
and Fire Gasses on Occupants of Shelters, by J. S.
Muraoka, Report NCEL-TR-144, July 1961.)
PREVENTION OF CRACKS AND
WET SHELTER PROBLEMS
If wet basements are a problem in your
locality, below ground shelters are likely to be
wet and unsatisfactory unless appropriate pre-
ventative measures are taken during their
design and construction. When making plans,
youshouldconsultlocalbuildersofsatisfactory
basements. You also should question persons
who at various times ofthe year have observed
excavations, holes, and/or basements in your
immediate vicinity, or have noted seasonal
swampy places or springs.
Themostdifficulttypeofsheltertokeepdry
for decades is one that is wholly or partially
below the water table for part or all ofthe year.
Concrete is not completely watertight. Water-
proofcoatingsandcoveringsoftenaredamaged
during construction, or deteriorate with age.Shelter walls sometimes crack due to settling
and earth movements. Metal shelters usually
develop small leaks long before they become
dangerously weakened.
A l00-occupant, below ground shelter, built
in 1984 near Dallas, Texas as a prototype blast
shelterfor industrial workers, wasflooded when
the water table rose. The poorly sealed opening
of this shelter's emergency exit was below
ground level, and after heavy rains was below
the water table. A prudently designed shelter
has the top of its emergency exit slightly above
the surface of the surrounding earth, as illus-
trated in Fig. 17.2. All underground electric
conduits leading down into a shelter must be
well sealed to prevent entry of water.
To prevent a wholly or partially below-
water-table shelter from becoming wet inside
sooner or later, it should have a sump and an
automatic sump pump todischarge waterto the
ground outside. If at any time you find that the
sump pump is discharging an appreciable
amount of water, you may have a serious wet-
shelter problem if electric power fails after an
attack.
A manually operated bilge pump and a
sufficiently long discharge hose can be bought
for about $20.00 from marine supply mail order
firms, including West Marine Products, Box
5189, SantaCruz, California95063, and Defender
Industries, Inc., P.O. Box 820, New Rochelle,
NewYork 10802-0820. (Longestablished marine
supply companies also are good sources ofuse-
proven chemical toilets, first aid kits, lights,
rope, etc.)
Shelter roof surfaces should be gently
sloped, no matterhowgood a waterproofcoating
is to be applied. 