 or other tape. Be
sure tofirst remove the roll from
its dispenser. Some of the other
kinds of tape will not produce a
high enough voltage.
c. QUICKLY unroll 10to 12inches
of tape by pulling its end with
the left hand. while the right
hand allows the roll to unwind
while remaining in about the
same "GET SET" position only
.an inch or two away from the
KFM.
d. While holding the unwound tape tight, about perpendicular to the
charging-wire, and about I j 4inch away from the end of the charging-wire,
promptly move both hands and the tapeto the right ratherslowly - taking
about 2 seconds to move about 8 inches. The electrostatic charge on the
unwound tape "jumps"the spark gaps from the tape to the upperend of the
charging-wireand from the lower end of the charging-wireto the aluminum
leaves, and charges the aluminum leaves.
Be sure neither leaf is touching a stop-thread.
Try to charge the leaves enough to spread them far enough apart to give a
reading ofat least 15mm, but no more than 20 mm afterthe KFM has
been gentlybumpedorshaken to remove anyunstable partofthe
charge.
e. Pull down on an insulating adjustment-thread to raise the lower end of the
charging-wire. lfthe charging-wire has been held in charging position by
its sticky-ended adjustment-thread being stuck to the top of the clear
plastic cover, it is best first to
pull down a little on the ~bare-ended adjustment-thread,
and then to move, p~1I down on~ . 'I. ,no SPARK GAP
and secure the sticky-ended 4
adjustment-thread tn the side nf ~ ~/ ~.~.;'\the can so that the lower part of y :",,
the charging-wire is close to the' .
underside of the clear plastic •
cover.
TRANSFERRING CHARGE
Do not touch the charging-wire.
f. Rewind the tape dght on its roll, for future use when other tape may not
be available.
Testing Your KFM to Learn if it Can
Accurately Measure Low Dose Rates
Putfresh drying agentin your KFM and then charge and testthe KFM
in a location where it is not exposed to abnormal radiation. Take an
initial reading. If after 3 hours its reading has decreased by 1mm, or
less. this means that its leaf-suspending threads are good insulators
and that your KFM can reliably measure dose rates as low as 0.03
roentgens per hour (30 milliroentgens per hour). By post-attack
standards, 30 mRlhr is a low dose rate. In a whole month of
continuous exposure (an impossibility, because fallout decays), 30
mRlhr would result in a dose of 21.9 roentgens - not enough to
incapacitate. Warning: In.heavy fallout areas, for the first few days
after fallout deposition the dose rates inside even most good shelters
will be higher than 0.03 R/hr.
Trouble Shooting
If charging does not separate the two leaves sufficiently, take these corrective
actions:
I. Besure the pieces ofanhydrite in the bottom of the ionizationchamber(the
can) are in a single layer, with no piece on top of another and the top of no
piece more than Ij2 inch above the bottom of the can.
2. Check to besure thatthe threads suspendingthe leavesare not crossed; then
try to charge the KFM again.
3. If the KFM still cannot be charged, replace the used anhydrite with fresh
anhydrite.
4. Ifyou cannotchargea KFM when the air isvery humid, charge it inside its
dry-bucket.
5. If you cannot charge the KFM while in an area of heavy fallout, take it to
the place affordingthe best protectionagainst radiation, and try to charge it
there. (A dose rate of several hundred Rj hr will neutralize the charges on
both the chargingdevice and the instrument so rapidly that a KFM cannot
be charged.)
If a KFM or other radiation measuring instrument gives unexpectedly high
readings inside a good shelter, wipeall dust off the outside ofthe instrumentand
repeat the radiation-measurements. 