 the tops
of clouds and above the altitudes at which quite
prompt removal of contaminants from the at-
mosphere by scavenging takes place. Very
small particles in the stratosphere do not reach
thegroundbeforethey areblownatleastseveral
thousand miles. Most of these tiny particles
remain airborne for weeks to years, are very
widely dispersed, and are blown around the
world several to many times before being de-
posited. By then the radioactivity of iodine-131
(that has a half life of only a little more than 8
days) is so greatly reduced that it is not nearly
as dangerous as is radioactive iodine deposited
much sooner with the fallout from smaller
weapons of several hundred kilotons, or less,
explosive power.
* Nuclear explosions smaller than about
half a megaton (500 kilotons) inject all or most
of their fallout to lower altitudes - within the
troposphere, below the stratosphere. Most of
such fallout is deposited during the radioactive
cloud'sfirst world-circlingtrip, wheneven quite
rapidlydecayingradioiodine stillisdangerous-
lyradioactive.This greaterdangerfrpm smaller
nuclearweapons has been provedby numerous
measurements of fallout from many nuclear
test explosions, both foreign and American.
• The dangers from trans-Pacific fallout pro-
duced by peacetime nuclear accidents are not
nearly as serious as many Americans have
been led to believe. Forexample, the Chernobyl
nuclearpowerreactoraccidentinjectedasmuch
radioactiveiodineintothe atmosphere aswould
theexplosionsof severalkiloton-range nuclear
weapons totaling perhaps as much as half a
megaton in explosive power. But not nearly as
muchoftheradioactivitycausedbythisreactor
accident reached the United States as would
reachus from severalnuclearexplosions inthe
same area, capableofinjectinganequalamount
of radioactivity into the atmosphere, because:
* The cloud from the steam explosion that
blew off the roof and otherwise damaged the
Chernobyl reactor building, may have risen
quite soon to 20,000 feet or more and was
partially blown eastwardclear across Asia and
the Pacific Ocean. However, the top of the
radioactive smoke cloud over the Chernobyl
power plant, that burned for days, rose only
about 3,000 feet above the ground. As a result,
muchof theairborneChernobyIradiation stayed
at relatively low altitudes where scavenging
(removal) of smoke and fallout particles and
gasses is mosteffectiveandrapid, dueto aggre-
gation on cloud droplets, rain-out, and dry
deposition. In contrast, almost all ofthe fallout
particles andradioactive gassesfrom a nuclear
explosionare injectedmuchhigher,to altitudes
where scavenging is less effective; there, the
generallyprevailingwest-to-eastwindsprompt-
ly start transporting very small particles and
radioactive gasses (that originate in the mid-
latitudes of the northern hemisphere) around
the world.
* Variable winds for days carried much of
the Chernobyl radioactive material northward
to Scandanavian countries, then westward and
southward to other European countries. The
resultant wide dispersal of this fallout allowed
timefor bothscavengingand radioactivedecay
before a small fraction of these invisible radio-
activecloudsrose andalsowereblowneastward
by the prevailing high-altitude winds. These
west winds carried an extremely smallfraction
of the radioactive emissions from the burning
Chernobyl plant clear across Asia and the
Pacific to America.
• The media habitually exaggerate dangers
from nuclear accidents, and exploited the Cher-
nobyl disaster. For example, when Dr. Robert
Gale, the leading bone marrow transplant spe-
cialistwhohelpedsave a fewChernobylvictims,
first returnedfrom Russia, an AssociatedPress
article quoted him as saying: "I think we can
say there are at least 50,000 to 100,000 peoplewho have had some dose of radiation which
might be of long-term concern. There will,
unfortunately, be additional casualties. We hope
the number will be small." The Rocky Mountain
News headlined"100,000SOVIETS TO SUFFER
FROM RADIATION, DOCTOR SAYS". Mary
McGrory, the syndicated liberal columnist, also
misinterpreted Dr. Gaie's risk estimate and
misinformed her readers- by writing: "He [Dr.
