vive the blast effects. The smaller an explo-
sion, the larger the dose of initial nuclear
radiation it delivers at a given blast overpres-
sure distance from ground zero. (For a discussion
of the more difficult shielding requirements of blast
shelters that would enable occupants to survive blast
effects much closer to explosions and therefore would
besubjected to much larger exposures of initial nuclear
radiation, see Appendix D, Expedient Blast Shelters.)
Figure 5.6 shows the completed shelter after it
was occupied by the family ofsixjust 32112 hoursafter
receiving the shelter-building instructions and
beginning preparations to evacuate. (This family won
a bonus for completion within 36 hours and also a
larger bonus given if all members then stayed inside
continuously for at least 72 hours.) To get a better
idea of how six people can liveinsucha small shelter,
look at the drawings at the end of Appendix A.2.
In warm or hot weather, shelters, especially
crowded ones, must be well ventilated and cooled by
an adequate volume of outdoor air pumped through
them. This family had built an efficient homemade air
pump (a KAP) and used it as described in Chapter 6
and Appendix R.ORNL-DWG 78-7204
SHELTER ROOM
THRESHOLD 80ARD
Fig. 5.5. Skyshine coming into a shelter through a vertical entry would be mostly absorbed while turning
into and traveling down the entryway trench.
Fig. 5.6. Earth mounded over a 31h-foot-wide Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. The canvas canopy would
protect the vertical entry against both fallout and rain. (Asmaller canopyover the air duct-emergencyexit at the
other end is obscured by the mounded earth.)All of the earthexcavated indiggingthe trenches
was mounded over the roof poles, making a covering
30 inches deep. This shelter had a protection factor
(PF) of over 300;that is,persons inside would receive
less than 1/300th of the gamma-ray dose of fallout
radiation that they would receive if they were
standing outside in the open.
To have made the roof covering more than 36
inches thick would not have increased the protection
against radiation very much, unless the entry trench
and the air duct-emergency exit trench had been dug
considerably longer. Field tests have shown that
some families, given only 48 hours, cannot dig the
longer trenches, cut the additional poles, and shovel
on the additional earth necessary for a shelter that
would offer significantly betterprotection than the
sheltershown here. The Pole-CoveredTrenchShelter
and the other shelters described in Appendix A all
have been built byuntrained families within 48hours,
the minimum time assumed to be available to
Americans before a possible attack if the Russians'
should begin tq evacuate their cities.
EARTH ARCHING USED TO
STRENGTHEN SHELTERS
Several types of expedient shelters can be made
to withstand greater pressures if their roofs are built
of yielding materials and covered with enough earth
to attain "earth arching." This arching results when
the yielding ofthe roofcauses partofthe load carried
by the roof to be shifted to the overlying earth
particles, which become rearranged in such a way
that an arch is formed. This arch carries the load to
surrounding supports that are less yielding. These
supports often include adjacent earth that has not
been disturbed.
To attain earth arching, the earth covering the
yielding roofmust be at least as deep as half the width
of the roof between its supports. Then the resultant
earth arch above the roof carries most of the load.
(A familiar example of effective earth arching is
its use with sheet metal culverts under roads. The
arching in a few feet of earth over a thin-walled
culvert prevents it from being crushed by the weight
of heavy vehicles.)
Figure 5.7shows how a flexible roofyields under
the weight of 30 inches ofearth mounded over it and
how earth arching develops. Afterthe arch isformed,
the only weight that the yielding roofsupports isthe
weight of the small thickness of earth between the
roof and the bottom of the arch.
Protective earth archingalso results ifa shelteris
covered with a material that compresses when
loaded, or if the whole roof or the whole shelter can
be pushed down a little without being broken.
ORNl·DWG 78·7441
1 It
Fig. 5.7. 