
loop ofrubber bands.
Charging the KFM with your hands inside the plastic bags,
operating the charging device. Have another person
illuminate the KFM with a flashlight. When adjusting the
charging-wire, move your hands very slowly. See the
dry-bucket photos.
a.
6. Reduce the length of two ordinary plastic bread bags (or similar
plastic bags) to a length that is5inches greater than the height ofthe
bucket. (Do not use rubber gloves in place of bags; gloves so used
result in much more humid outside air being unintentionally pumped
into a dry-bucket when it is being used while charging a KFM inside
it.)
7. Insert a plastic bag into each hand-hole, and fold the edge of the
plastic bag about 1/2 inch over the taped vertical "wall" around
each hand-hole.
8. Strengthen the upper parts of the plastic bags by folding 2-inch
pieces oftape over the top ofthe "wall" around each hand-hole.
9. Make about a quart of anhydrite by heating small pieces of
wall-board gypsum, and keep this anhydrite dry in a Mason jar or
otherairtightcontainerwith a rubber or plastic sealer.
10. Make a circular aluminum-foil cover to place over the plastic cover
when the dry-bucket is not being used for minutes to hours. Make
this cover with a diameter about 4 inches greater than the diameter
of the top of the bucket, and make it fit more snugly with an
encircling loop of rubber bands, or with string. Although not
essential, an aluminum-foil cover reduces the amount ofwater vapor
that can reach and pass through the plasticcover, thus extending the
lifeofthe drying agent.
11. Charge a KFM inside a dry-bucketby:
Taking offwrist watch and sharp-pointedrings that might tear
the plasticbags.
b. Placing inside the dry-bucket:
(1) About a cup ofanhydrite or silica gel;
(2) the KFM, with its charging-wire adjusted in its charging
position; and
(3) dry, folded paper and the electrostatic charging device,
best a 5-inch-long piece of Plexiglas with smoothed
edges, to be rubbed between dry paper folded about 4
inches square and about20sheets thick. (Unrolling a roll
of tape inside a dry-bucket is an impractical charging
method.)
12. Expose the KFM to fallout radiation either by:
a. Leaving the KFM inside the dry-bucket while exposing it to
fallout radiation for one of the listed time intervals, and
reading the KFM before and after the exposure while it
remains inside the dry-bucket. (The reading eye should be a
measured 12 inches above the SEAT of the KFM, and a
flashlight or other light should be used.)
b. Taking the charged KFM out of the dry-bucket to read it,
expose it, and read it after the exposure. (If this is done
repeatedly, especially in a humid shelter, the drying agent
willnot be effective for many KFM chargings, and willhave to
be replaced.)
XV. Howto Use a KFM aftera NuclearAttack
A. Background Information
Ifduring a rapidly worsening crisis threatening nuclear war you are in the
place where you 'plan to take shelter, postpone studying the instructions
following this sentence until after you have:
(1) built or improved a high-protection-factor shelter (if
possible, a shelter covered with 2 or 3 ft of earth and
separatefrom flammable buildings), and
(2) made a KAP (homemade shelter-ventilating pump) if you
have the instructions and materials, and
(3) stored at least 15gallons ofwaterfor each shelter occupant if
you can obtaincontainers.
Havinga KFM or any other dependable fallout meter and knowing how to
operate it will enable you to minimize radiation injuries and possible
fatalities, especially by skillfully using a high-protection-factor fallout
shelter to control and limit exposures to radiation. By studying this
section youfirst willieam how to measure radiation dose rates (roentgens
per hour =R/hr), how to calculate doses [R] received in different time
intervals, and how to determine time Interval. (hours and/or minutes) in
which specified doses would be received. Then this section lists the sizes
ofdoses (numberofR) that the average person can tolerate without being
sickened, that he is likely to survive, and that he is likely to be killed by.
