 short
supply after a nuclearattack. This amount isvery low
when compared to the average diet eaten in this
country, in which fat provides about 40% of the
calories. It would be difficult for many Americans to
consume sufficient calories to maintain normal
weight and morale without a higher fat intake; more
fat should be made available as soon as possible.
Increased fat intake is especially importantfor young
children, to provide calories needed for normal
growth and development. Oak Ridge National
Laboratory field tests have shown that toddlers and
old people, especially, prefer considerably more oil
added to grain mush than the emergency recom-
mendation of 10%.
• Vitamin 8-12 and Animal Protein
Vitamin 8-12 isthe only essential nutrient that is
available in nature solely from animal sources. Since
a normal person has a 2 to 4-year supply of vitamin
8-12 stored in his liver, a deficiency should not
develop before enough food of animal origin would
again be available.
Many adults who are strict vegetarians keep
in good health for years without any animal sources
of food by using grains and beans together. It is
more difficult to maintain normal growth and
development in young children on vegetarian diets.
When sufficient animal sources of food areavailable,
enough should be provided to supply 7 grams of
animal protein daily. This could be provided by
about 1.4ounces (38 g) of lean meat, 0.7 ounce (20 g)
of nonfat dry milk, or one medium-sized egg. When
supplies are limited, young children should be given
priority. Again: a little of these high-grade supple-
mentary protein foods should be eaten with every
meal.
• Iron
Most people live out their lives without benefit
of an iron supplement. However, many pregnant
and nursing women and some children need
supplemental iron to prevent anemia. One tested
expedient way to make more iron available is to use
iron pots and pans, especially for cooking acid foods
such as tomatoes. Another is to place plain iron nails
(not galvanized nails) in vinegar until small amounts
of iron beginto float to the surface. Thisusuallytakes
2 to 4 weeks. Then a teaspoon of iron-vinegar
solution will contain about 30 to 60 mg of iron,
enough for a daily supplement. The emergency
recommendation is 10mg per day. A teaspoon of the
iron-vinegar solution is best taken in a glass of water.
The iron content of fruit, such as an apple, can be
increased by placing iron nails in it for a few days.
FOOD RESERVES
Russia, China, and other countries that make
serious preparations to survive disasters store large
quantities offood-primarilygrain-both infarming
areas and- near population centers. In contrast, the
usually large U.S. stocks of grain and soybeans are
an unplanned survival resource resulting from the
production of more food than Americans can eat or
sell abroad. The high productivity of U.S. agriculture
is another unplanned survival asset. Providing
enough calories and other essential nutrients for
100 million surviving Americans would necessitate
the annual raising of only about 12% of our 1985
crop ofcorn, wheat, grain sorghum, and soybeans
- if nothing else were produced. In 1985, the U.S.production of corn, wheat, soybeans, and grain
sorghum totalled about 625 billion pounds -
about 7 pounds per day for one year for every
American. A total of 2 pounds per person per day of
these basic staples, in the proportions shown in Table
9.2, would be sufficient to provide the essentials of an
adequate vegetarian diet weighing about 27 ounces.
(Grain sorghum is not listed in Table 9.2; it has
approximately the same food value as corn.) The
remaining 5ounces of the 2 pounds would feed enough
chickens to meet a survivor's minimum long-term re-
quirement for animal protein.
If corn, wheat, grain sorghum, and soybeans were
the only crops raised, the annual production would need
to beonly739 poundsperperson. Our 1985annual
production would have supplied every adult,
child, and infant in a population of 100 million
with 6250 pounds of these four staples..This is
more than 8 times enough to maintain good
nutrition by Chinese standards.
Recovery from a massive nuclear attack would
depend largelyon sufficientfood reservesbeingavailable
to enable survivors to concentrate on restoring the
essentials of mechanized farming. 