 (a KAP
or a DirectionalFan) were to be used. A much
larger air-exhaust opening is needed. See
Appendix A.3.
BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK AND CHAIR
On the last night of the Utah family's shelter
stay it was clear that the six members'would win the
cash bonusoffered them for their 72-houroccupancy
of the shelter starting immediately after they com-
pleted building it. Therefore, the author showed them
that night how to make boat-shaped hammocks out of
bedsheets. (Any strong cloth of the right size can.be
used.) They were shown how to hang these short, yet
stable, hammocks securely from poles of the shelter
roof. With three members sleeping in hammocks, two
on the plywood bunks, and one on the floor, all six
could sleepat the same time. Figure 14.3shows part of
this sleepingarrangement.
Fig. 14.3. Girl resting in a boat-shaped ham-
mock. Her brother slept on the upper bunk of their
31 2-ft-wide trench shelter.
In a shelter this sizewithout bunks, hangingfour
short hammocks at slight angles to the length of the
trench would permit four occupants to sleep
comfortably. An additional two persons could sleep
on the floor. In the Utah family's shelter, the floor
was made comfortable by covering the damp earth
with pieces of polyethylene cut from trash bags, then
placing strips of shag rug over the plastic.
In shelters with ceilings at least 6 feet high, one
hammock can be hung above another. In a Small-
Pole Shelter that is 6 feet wide, a greater number of
people can sleep or sitcomfortablyat the same time if
Bedsheet-Hammocks and Bedsheet-Chairs are used
rather than benches or a combination ofbenchesand
overhead bunks. Figure 14.4 shows how Bedsheet-
Hammocks can be used like double-deck bunks.
Fig. 14.4. Bedsheet-Hammockshungone above
the other across the room of a Russian-type Small-
Pole Shelter made of lumber.
Detailed instructions for making a Bedsheet-
Hammock and a Bedsheet-Chair are given at the end
of this chapter.In an evacuation during a real crisis, carrying
comfortable folding chairs and the materials to make
wooden bunks would not be advisable. If the family
car were loaded instead with an equivalent weight of
additional food andclothing, the members'prospects
of surviving would be improved. But in an actual
crisis evacuation, a family planning to occupy a
shelter with a strong roof should take along a
bedsheet for each member. The other lightweight
items described in the instructions for making a
Bedsheet-Hammock and a Bedsheet-Chair also
should becarried. Byfollowing the instructionsat the
end of this chapter, a comfortable hammock can be
made and quickly converted to a comfortable
suspended chair when not needed for sleeping.
Hammocks hung high off the floor and above
other sleepers must be strong, securely suspended,
and cupped so that it is impossible to fall out
accidentally. This is why the instructions emphasize
using a double thickness of bedsheet and folding the.
cloth so as to make the hammock boat-like, with high
sides.
In a cold shelter, keeping warm in a hammock is
somewhat difficult. Easily compressible materials,
such as those used in a sleeping bag, are squeezed so
thin undera person's body thatthey lose most oftheir
insulating value. Pads of newspapers about an inch
thick, protected by cloth coverings, will reduce heat
losses. The best insulation is a quilt, fastened to the
underside of a hammock by attaching it with rows of
stitches every few inches and at right angles to each
other.
Figure 14.5 shows a Bedsheet-Hammock that
had been quickly converted into a Bedsheet-Chair
and hung neara shelterwall. It occupieslessthan half
the floor space used by the two hammocks shown in
the preceding illustration. If a reclining seat is
desired, the two support-points· on the ceiling to
which the chair-arm cords are attached can be
located farther out from the wall.
Enough padding material should be placed in
the bowl-shaped seat of a Bedsheet-Chair to make it
rather flat. Extra clothing or a folded blanket can be
used. 