 only essential
foods that soon would be in very short supply. The
parents of babies and young children who had stored
potassium iodidewould beespeciallythankful they had
made this very inexpensive preparation, that can give
99%-effective protectionto the thyroid. All members of
families with a supply of potassium iodide could safely
eat a normal diet long before those without it could do
so.
The most dangerous type of radioactive iodine
decays rapidly. At the end of each 8-day period it gives
off only half as much radiation as at the start of that
period. So at the end of 80 days it emits only about
1/1000as much radiation per hour as at the beginning
of these 80days. Because of this rapid decay, a 100-day
supply of potassium iodide should be sufficient if a
nuclear war, either overseas or within the United
States, were to last no more than a week or two.The probabilityof most Americans beingsupplied
with prophylactic potassium iodide during a major
nucleardisasterappearslow. Under present regulations
the decision concerning whether to stockpile and
dispense potassium iodidetablets rests solely with each
state's governor."
• Need for thyroid protection after a nuclear
attack on the United States.-
After a nuclear attack, very few of the survivors
would be able to obtain potassium iodide or to get
adviceabout when to start takingit or stop takingit. In
areas of heavy fallout, some survivors without potas-
sium iodide would receiveradiationdoses large enough
to destroy thyroid function before modern medical
treatments would again become-available. Even those
injuries to the thyroid that result in itscomplete failure
to function cause fewdeaths in normaltimes, but under
post-attackconditions thyroid damage would be much
more hazardous.
• Ways to obtain potassium iodide
for prophylactic use.
* By prescription.
With a prescription from a doctor, a U.S.P.
saturated solution of potassiumiodidecan be boughtat
many pharmacies today. (In a crisis, the present local
supplies would be entirely inadequate.) The saturated
solution contains a very small amount of a compound
that prevents it from deteriorating significantly for a
few years. It is best stored in a dark glass bottle with a
solid, non-metallic cap that screws on liquid-tight. A
separate medicine dropper should be kept in the same
place. An authoritative publication-s of the National
Committeeon Radiation Protectionand Measurements
states: "Supplies of potassium iodide can be stored in a
variety of places, including homes, ... "
In 1990 the price ofa 2-ounce bottle ofU.S.P.
saturatedsolutionofpotassium iodide, which is
sold by prescription only, ranges from about
$7.00 to $11.00 in Colorado. A 2-ounce bottle
contains about 500 drops. Four drops provide
the daily dose of 130 mg for adults and for
children older than one year. For babies less
than one year old, the daily dose of asaturated
solutionistwodrops(65 mg).Thusapproximate-
ly 99% effective protection against the subse-
quentuptakeofradioactiveiodine bythe thyroid
can be gotten by taking saturated potassium
iodide solution. If bought by prescription, today
the recommended daily dose costs 6 to 9 cents.
* Without prescription.
In 1990 the leadingcompanyselling130-mg
potassium iodide tablets without prescription
and bymailorderinthe UnitedStatesis ANBEX,
Inc., P.O. Box 861, Cooper Station, New York,
N.Y. 10276.Twobottles,eachcontainingfourteen
130-mg potassium iodide tablets, cost $10.00.
Thus the costper24-hourdose is36 cents. Tothe
best of my knowledge, the company in the U.S.
that in July of 1990 is selling 130-mg KI tablets
without prescription at the lowest price is Pre-
paredness Products, 3855 South 500 West, Bldg.
G, Salt Lake City, Utah 84115. This company
sells 14 tablets, in a brown, screw-cap glass
bottle, for $3.50, postpaid, including shipping
charges. For three or more bottles, the price is
$2.50 per bottle.
