. Carefully level and smooth the ground to a
distance of 21/2 ft from the sides of the trench, so
that the doors will lie flat on the ground up to the
edges of the trench.
15. If plenty of sheets, bedspreads, plastic, and/or
other materials are available, cover the trench
walls with them. Wall coverings should stop one
inch from the floor of the trench to prevent their
being stepped on and pulled down. Plastic wall
coverings keep some types of damp earth walls
from drying out and crumbling.16. To be able to place an adequate thickness of
shielding earth all the way to and around the
entryway and ventilation hole, stack improvised
"sandbags" around these two openings before
placing the earth on the roof. Or use cloth or
plastic material to make "rolls" of earth, as
illustrated in the introductory section of Appen-
dix A.
17. Shovel earth around the rolls, sandbags, or other
means used to raise the level of the earth around
the two shelter openings. Slope this earth
outward, and pack it, so that rainwater on the
ground cannot run into the shelter.
18. To rainproof the shelter and to prevent the
roofing doors from being dampened and
weakened, use available waterproof materials as
follows:
a. If the earth is dry, the easiest and best way to
make a rainproof roof is to place the doors'
directly on the ground, with each of the end
doors overlapping an end of the main trench
by 4 or 5 in. (Be sure again to levelthe ground
surface as you place each door, so that each
lies flat against the ground all the way to the
edges of the trench.) Next, mound dry earth
over the doors. First place a few inches of
earth on the doors near their.ends; then
mound it about 12 in. deep above the
centerline of the trench. Slope the earth to
both sides so as to just cover the ends of the
doors. :\ext. smooth off the earth mound.
being careful to remove sharp stones that
might puncture rainproof materials. Then
place waterproof material over the smooth
mound. making the "buried roof" shown in
Fig. A.!. Finally, carefully mound an addi-
tional 12to 15in. of earth on top of the buried
roof. again placing it first over the doors near
their ends. The earth over the trench should
be at least 2 ft thick. so that effective earth
arching will support most of the weight of the
earth covering and will provide considerable
protection if struck by blast.
b. If the earth is wet, place the waterproof
material directly on top of the doors, to keep
them dry and strong. To make water run off
this waterproof covering and to keep water
from collecting on a horizontal surface and
leaking through, slope the doors toward one
side of the trench by first making one side of
the trench about 3 in. higher than the other
side. A way to raise one side-s-without
increasing the distance the doors must
span-is to place an earth-filled "roll" of
bedsheets or other material along one edge of
the trench. To keep the waterproof material
used to cover the doors from slidingdown the
slope of the doors when earth is shoveled on,
tuck the upper edge ofthe material under the
higher ends of the doors. Finally, mound
earth over the doors. first placing it neartheir
ends. The mound should be at least 2 ft deep
above the centerline ofthe roofand about 3or
4 in. deep over both ends of the doors.
If more waterproof material is available than
is required to make a buried roof (or to cover
the doors) and to make the illustrated
canopies over the two shelter openings, use
this excess material to cover the wet ground
on which the doors are placed.
19. Dig small drainage ditches around the completed
shelter, to lead runoff water away.
20. To keep rain and; or sand-like fallout particles
from falling into the shelter openings, build an
open-sided canopy over each opening, as
illustrated in Fig. A, shown in the introductory
sectio.n of Appendix A.
21. Install the air pump (a KAP) in the shelter
opening into which air is already naturally
moving.
22. 