elter, air-distribution KAPs should be used inside
most large shelters. These KAPs are used within the
shelter, separate from and in addition to air-supply
KAPs (see Fig. 16).Air-distribution KAPs can serve
in place of both air-distribution ducts and cooling
fans. For these purposes, one or more 3-ft-high KAPs
hung overhead from the shelter ceiling are usually
most practical. IfKAPs cannot readily be hung from
the ceiling, they can be supported on light frames
made of boards or metal, somewhat like those used
for a small child's swing.
KAP for every 25 occupants. In relatively wide
shelters, these interior KAPs should be positioned so
that they produce an airflow that circulates around
the shelter, preventing the air that is being pumped
into the shelter from flowing directly to the exhaust
opening. Figure 16illustrates how four KAPs can be
used in this way to distribute the air within a shelter
and to fan the 100occupants of a 1000-sq.-ft shelter
room. Avoid positioning an air-distribution KAP so
that it pumps air in a direction greater than a right
angle turn from the direction of airflow ~o the
location of the KAP.
D. Operation with a Pulley
A small KAP-especially one with improvised
hinges or one installed at head-height or higher-can
be pulled most efficiently by running its pull-cord
over a pulley or over a greased homemade "pulley"
such as described in Figs. 17and 18.Apulley Should
be 'hung at approximately the same height as the
hinges of the KAP, as illustrated in Fig. 15.To make
ORNL OWG 72-7547 ORNL OWG 71-7242
Fig. 16. The use of air-distribution KAPs.
You should make and use enough KAPs to
cause air movement that can be felt in all parts of
your shelter. Remember that if KAPs are installed
near the floor and the shelter is fully occupied, the
occupants' bodies will partially block the pumped
airflow more than if the same KAPs were suspended
overhead.
As a general rule, for shelters having more than
about 20 occupants, provide one 3-ft air-distribution Fig. 17.
CUT
NOTCHES
BEAT NOTCH OF
GREEN FORK WITH
HAMMER UNTIL
BARK WILL PEEL
OFF, LEAVING
SMOOTH WOOD.
IMPROV1SED "PULLEY" FROM A
WIDE-ANGLED FORKED LIMB.
LUBRICATE NOTCH AND
PULLEY CORD WITH GREASE,
VASELINE, OR EVEN A BAR
OF SOAP - TO PREVENT f
PULLEY-CORD FROM BEING
BURNT BY FRICTION AND
""". ,{
Y-BRIDLE OF LIGHT CORD'
OR WIRE
33ft
I-ORNL DWG 71-7243 ORNL DWG 72-6365A
2 in.
L
END VIEW
1;32 in. SHIM
OR SPACER
DOOR
FRAME
advantage of changes in the direction of natural
airflow through the shelter.
• If the KAP is installed on quick-removal
brackets, in an emergency a person standing beside
the KAP could grasp its frame withboth hands, lift it
upward a few inches to detach it, and carry it out of
the way-s-all in 3 to 5seconds. Beingable to move the
KAP quickly could prevent blast winds from
wrecking the pump, which might also be blown into
your shelter-possibly injuring occupants. In exten-
sive areas where fallout shelters and their occupants
would survive the blast effects of typical large
warheads, more than4 seconds would elapse between
the time shelter occupants would see the extremely
bright light from the explosion and the arrival of a
blast wave strong enough to wreck a KAP or other
pumps left exposed in a ventilation opening.
Note in Fig. 19 that the KAP's "fixed"support-
board (a 31/ z-in.-wide board to which its hinges are
attached) is held in a bracket only 2 inches deep. To
prevent too tight a fit in the bracket, besure to place a
1hz-in. shim or spacer (the cardboard back of a
writing tablet will do) between two boards of the
bracket, as illustrated. 