man, or telephone operator).
* You have some tools with which to build or im-
prove a fallout shelter. You also have water con-
tainers, food, clothing, etc., adequate for lifein the
area to which you would go.
Instructions for building expedient fallout and
blast shelters and for making expedient life-support
equipment are given in following chapters. The
reader is advised to study all of this book carefully
before making up his mind regarding basic survival
action.
THE NEED FOR AN
EVACUATION CHECKLIST
A good flyer, no matter how many years he has
flown. runs through a checklist covering his plane
before taking off. Similarly, acitizen preparing under
crisis pressures to do something he has never done
before~evacuate-should use a checklist to be sure
that he takes with him the most useful of hisavailable
possessions.
Unfavorable to Evacuation:
* You live outside a highest-risk or high-risk
area and could build an expedient fallout shelter
and make other survival preparations where you
live.
* You have no means of transportation or
you believe that roads are likely to be blocked
by the time you make your decision.
* You are sick, decrepit, or lack the will to try
to survive if things get tough.
* You cannot suddenly leave your home area
for several days without hurting others.
* You lack the tools, etc., that would be
helpful-i-but not necessarily essential-to success-
ful evacuation.
A family planning to use an expedient shelter or
basement.at or near home also should use the
Evacuation Checklist on the following page to make
sure needed survival items are not overlooked.
The family of six pictured in Fig. 4.3 used the
Evacuation Checklist given below to select the most
useful things that could be carried in and on their
small car. They assembled categories of items in
separate piles, then selected some items to take with
them from each pile. They were able to leave their
home 76 minutes after receiving the Evacuation
Checklist. (Following chapters of this book include
descriptions of this family's success in evacuating,
building a Pole-CoveredTrench Shelter, and living in
it continuously for 77 hours.)EVACUAnON CHECKLIST
Includes items for building or improving shelters)
Loading Procedure: Make separate piles for
ach category (except categories I and 5). Then load
ne car with some items from each category, taking
s much as can be safely carried and being careful
J leave room for all passengers.
\. THE MOST NEEDED ITEMS
Category I. Survival Information: Shelter-
buildingand other nuclear survival
instructions, maps, all available
small battery-powered radios and
extra batteries, a fallout metersuch
as a homemade KFM (see Appen-
dix C), and writing materials.
Category 2. Tools: Shovel, pick, saw (a bow-
saw is best), ax or hatchet, file,
knife, pliers, and any other tools
specified in the building instruc-
tions for the shelter planned. Also
take work gloves.
Category 3. Shelter-Building Materials: Rain-
proofing materials (plastic, shower
curtains, cloth, etc.) as specified in
the instructions for the type of
shelter planned. Also, unless the
weather is very cold, a homemade
shelter-ventilating pump such as a
KAP, or the materials to build one
(see Appendix B).
Category 4. Water: Small, filled containers plus
all available large polyethylene trash
bags, smaller plastic bags and pillow
cases, water-purifying material such
as Clorox, and a teaspoon for
measuring.
Category 5. Peacetime valuables: Money, credit
cards, negotiablesecurities, valuable
jewelry, checkbooks, and the most
important documents kept at home.
(Evacuation may be followea
not by nuclear war, but by con-
tinuingunstablenuclearpeace.)
Category 6. Light: Flashlights, candles, mate-
rials to improvise cooking-oil lamps
(2 clear glass jars of about l-pint
size, cooking oil, cotton string for
wicks(seeChapter II, Light), kitchen
matches, and a moisture-proof jar
for storing matches.
Category 7. Clothing: Cold-weatherboots, over-
shoes, and warm outdoor cloth-
ing (even in summer, since after
an attack these would be unobtain-
able), raincoats and ponchos. Wear
work clothes and work shoes.
Category 8. 