elter. For example, if 200 cfm of air is being
pumped into a shelt~r through a gooseneck of
5-inch-diameter pipe with its mouth also 5
inchesindiameter,the velocityofthe air up into
the mouth of the gooseneck is about 1,440 feet
per minute, and sand-like spherical particles
smaller than approximately 500 microns in
diameteralso are "sucked" Up.6Butifthe5-inch
gooseneck's mouth is 10 inches across, then the
upward air velocity is reduced to about 360 feet
per minute, and only particles smaller than
approximately 180microns across are "sucked"
up. Particles in the 180 to 500 micron-diameter
range are relatively large and fall to earth in
about 40 to 70 minutes from 35,000 feet, the base
of the mushroomcloudofa 1-megatonexplosion.
(SeeFig.6.4.)Theseparticlesareverydangerous
because theirradioactivityhashadlittletimeto
decay, and should be kept out of a shelter's
ventilationsystem. Furthermore, largeparticles
retained in a shelter's filter restrict airflow
sooner than do small ones. (If an appropriately
curved piece of5-inch steelpipecannotbefound
in a salvage yard or elsewhere, a good welder
can use 5-inch steel pipe to make a substitute
gooseneck with two 90-degree turns.)
• Do not use air intake hoods on a permanent
shelter's pipes, because hoods are not as effec-
tive as goosenecks in 'preventing fallout par-
ticles from entering ventilation pipes. Also,pumping a given volume of air through a hood
is more work than pumping the same volume
through a gooseneckwithequalcross-sectional
areas.
• Never install any screen inside a gooseneck
or air intake hood, because spider webs and the
debris that sticks to webs will greatly reduce
airflow. The author saw a gooseneck with a
blast valve built inside it; spider webs and
attached trash on this blast valve had conse-
quentially reduced the volume of air that this
shelter's pump coulddeliver. Of course a screen
is much more easily obstructed than a blast
valve.YetFEMA'swidelydistributed pamphlets
on a permanent Horne Fallout Shelter (H-12-1)
and on a Home Blast Shelter (H-12-3) continue
in successive editions to give detailed instruc-
tions for making an air intake hood with a
screen soldered inside it. Butthese sheltersthat
never have been built have much more serious
weaknesses, including the likelihood that the
aboveground parts of the ventilation pipes of
the blast shelter would be bent over or broken
off by blast-wind-hurled parts of buildings and
trees, even in suburbia. (350 mph is the maxi-
mum velocity of the blast wind where the blast
overpressure is 15 psi from a 1-megaton air
burst.s The ventilation openings of the blast-
tested expedient blast shelters described in
Appendix D are much more likely to remain
serviceableafter beingsubjectedto severeblast
effects, because blast-protector logs are placed
around their openings, that are only a few
inches above ground level.)
PREVENTION AND CONTROL
OF CONDENSATION
A shelter can be watertight, yet at certain
seasons of the year its walls, ceiling, and floor
can be dripping wet withwater condensed from
enteringoutdoor air. (This is a seriousproblem,
except in arid parts of the West.) During the
winter months a shelter and its surrounding
earth get cold; then especially on some spring
days the dew point of entering outdoor air is
higher than the temperature of the shelter's
interior surfaces. As a result, condensation
occurs onthose surfaces that are coolerthan the
dew point of the pumped-through air.
The most dramatic example that I have
observed of the seriousness ofthis condensation
problem was the drippingceilingand wetwalls
of a reinforced-concrete, family-sized shelter
that I inspected on an early spring day at the
Civil Defence College in Yorkshire, England.
Suchcondensation also can occur in above-
ground structures. Before World War II I had a
600-year-oldbedroominQueen's College, Oxford
University. My bedroom's outer wall was made
of solid limestone blocks about 15 inches thick,
simply plastered and painted on the inside. 