 air can be "sucked" back into the room.ORNL DWG 72-8203
///
/
\PULL-CORD PULLING
\
~ \. "'~ ~ /,/-----
.Ie--...-- r" '"~ r": Jt"-./------
~ ~ K J? /
f 8-ft "DIVIDER" IN DOORWAY
Fig. 27. Use of a "divider" to ventilate a shelter with only one opening.
F. Installing a KAP in a Steel-Framed Doorway
If you need to install a KAP in a steel-framed
doorway and it is not feasible to screw or otherwise
permanently connect it to the doorway, you can
attach the KAP by using a fewboards and some cord,
as illustrated by Figs. 28 and 29. The two horizontal
boards shown extending across the doorway are
squeezed tightly against the two sides of the wall in
which the doorway is located by tighteningtwo loops
of cord, one near each side of the doorway. One loop
is illustrated. A cord is first tightened around the two
horizontal boards. Then the looped cord is further
tightened by binding it in the center with another
cord. as illustrated.
Two large "C"clamps serve even better than two
looped cords. However, secure support for a
swinging KAP still requires the use of a vertical
support board on each side of the doorway, as
illustrated. .
STEEL DOOR
FRAME
CONCRETE
WALL
;~, -:
DRNL DWG72·6364
Fig. 28.ORNL DWG 72-66'7
• You have enough low-resistance filters (such as
fiberglass dust filters used in furnaces and air-
conditioners) and other materials for building the
necessary large, supported filter in front of your
KAP.
• Your KAP can pump an adequate volume ofair
through the filter and shelter.
• The filter is installed so that it can be easily
removed if shelter temperatures rise too high.
H. Using Air Filters
To supply shelter occupants with filtered air
usually would be of much less importance to their
survival and health than to provide them with
adequate volumes of outdoor air to maintain
tolerable temperatures. However, filtering the
entering air could prove worthwhile, provided:
• Your shelter is not in an area likely to be
subjected to blast, or it is a blast shelter with blast
doors and blast valves protecting everything inside.
• Work on filters is started after you have
completed more essential work, including the
building of a high-protection-factor shelter, making,
installing,and testing the necessary numberof KAPs,
storing. adequate water, making a homemade fallout
meter, etc.
VERTICAL SUPPORT BOARD
EXTENDING DOWN TO FLOOR
--------- BOARD THE SAME THICKNESS
AS THE "FIXED" SUPPORT
BOARD OF THE KAP
Fig. 29.
"lI'""--r----- BOARD FORMING A 2-in-DEEP
BRACKET, WITH AN APPROX.
\!32'm. SHIM UNDER ITQUICKLY REMOVABLE
"FIXED" SUPPORT
FOR KAP
LOOPED CORD, TIGHTENED IN CENTER,
HOLDING BOARDS TIGHT AGAINST STEEL
DOOR FRAME.
Figure 29 shows a quick-removal bracket
supported by two horizontal boards tightened across
the upper part of a doorway by looped cords, as
described above. Also, study Fig. 19 and its
accompanying instructions.
G. Building More Durable KAPs
If you are building KAPs in normal times, you
may want to use materialsthat will makeyourpumps
last longer, even though these materials are more
.difficult to obtain and are more expensive.
Durability tests have shown that the KAP parts
that wear out first are the flaps and the pulleys. In6-ft
KAPs, the lower flaps are subject to hard use. Lower
flaps made of 6-oz (per sq.. yd), clear, nylon-
reinforced, plied vinyl have lasted undamaged for
over 1000 hours of full-stroke pumping, without
having their edges reinforced. Lowerflaps made of6-
mil nylon-reinforced polyethylene, without edge
reinforcements, have lasted for 1000hours with only
minor damage.
To prevent a filter used with a KAP from
causing too greata reduction in the volume ofair that
the KAP can pump through your shelter, you must
use large areas of low-resistance filter material. 