 for long occupancy, and
remain with their possessions.
The following descriptions of the characteristics
and components of expedient blast shelters should
enable many readers to use locally available materials
to provide at least 15-psi blast protection. Pre-crisis
preparations are essential, as wellas the abilityto work
veryhard for two to four days. (Field-tested instructions
are not yet available; to date only workers who were
supervised have built expedient blast shelters.s)
PRACTICALITY OF EXPEDIENT
BLAST SHELTERS
At Hiroshimaand Nagasaki,simple wood-framed
shelters with about 3 feet of earth over wooden roofs
were undamaged by blast effects in areas where
substantial buildings were demolished."Figure 0.1 shows a Hiroshima shelter that people
with hand tools could build in a day, if poles or
timber were available. This shelter withstood blast
and fire at an overpressure range of about 65 psi. Its
narrow room and a 3-foot-thick earth cover brought
about effective earth arching; this kept its yielding
wooden frame from being broken.
Fig. OJ. A small, earth-covered backyard
shelter with a crude wooden frame-undamaged,
although only 300 yards from ground zero at
Hiroshima.
Although the shelter itself was undamaged, its
occupants would have been fatally injured because
the shelter had no blast door. The combined effect of
blast waves, excessive pressure, blast wind, and burns
from extremely hot dust blown into the shelter (the
popcorning effect) and from the heated air would
have killed the occupants. For people to survive in
areas of severe blast, their shelters must have strong
blast doors.
In nuclear weapons tests in the Nevada desert,
box-like shelters built of lumber and covered with
sandy earth were structurally undamaged by 10- to
15-psi blast effects. However, none had blast doors,
so occupants of these open shelters would have been
injured by blast effects and burned as a result of the
popcorning effect. Furthermore, blast winds blew
away much ofthe dry, sandyearth mounded over the
shelters for shielding; this resulted in inadequate
protection against fallout radiation.
Twelve different types ofexpedient shelterswere
blast-tested by Oak Ridge National Laboratory
during three of Defense NuclearAgency's blast tests.5
Two of these tests each involved the detonation of a
million pounds or more of conventional explosive;
air-blast effects equivalent to those from a l-kiloton
nuclear surface burst were produced by these
chemical explosions.
Several of these shelters had expedient blast
doors which were closed during the tests. Figure 0.2
shows the undamaged interior of the best expedient
blastsheltertested priorto 1978,an improvedversion
of the Small-Pole Shelter described in Appendix A.
Its two heavy plywood blast doors excluded
practically all blast effects; the pressure inside rose
only to 1.5 psi-an overpressure not nearly high
enough to break eardrums. The only damage was to
the expedient shelter-ventilating pump (a KAP) in
the stoop-in entryway. Two men worked about 5
minutes to replace the 4 flap-valves that were blown
loose.
Fig. 0.2. Undamaged interior of a Small-Pole
Shelter after blast testing at the 53-psi overpressure
range. Large buildings would have been completely
demolished.
When blast-tested at 5-psi overpressure, not
even the weakest covered-trench shelters with
unsupported earth walls (described in Appendix A)
were damaged structurally. However, ifthe coveringearth were sandy and dry and ifit wereexposed to the
blast winds of a megaton explosion at the 5-psi
overpressure range, so much earth would be blown
away that the shelter would give insufficient
protection against fallout radiation. Much of the dry,
shielding earth mounded over some of the above-
ground shelters was, in fact, removed by the blast
winds of these relatively small test explosions, evenat
the lower overpressure ranges at which homes would
be wrecked. In contrast, in blast tests where the
steeply mounded earth was damp, little blast-wind
erosion resulted. (The reader should remember that
even if shelters without blast doors are undamaged,
the occupants are likely to suffer injuries.