, it is best to write first, to learn the
postage-paid cost.
* Civil defense professionals of foreign
countries also have concluded that KFMs have
lifesavingpotential.TheJune 1978SpecialIssue
of The Journal of the Institute of Civil Defence
("The Premier Society of Disaster Studies",
with headquarters in London) was entirely
devoted to the KFM, and gave international
distribution to the original complete instruc-
tions and cut-outpaperpatterns. The interestof
Chinese civil defense officials in the KFM and
my otherlow costsurvivalinventions ledtomy
making, with White House approval, two long
trips in China as an official guest. In eight
Chinesecities I acquired survival know-how by
exchanging civil defense information with top
civil defense officials.
• A Major Disadvantage: A KFM
Looks Like a Toy
*. This instrument appears too simple to
be trusted to measure deadlyradiation, a fright-
eningmysteryto mostpeople. Typicalmoderns .
are accustomedto pushingbuttons andtwisting
dials to get information instantly from instru-
ments they do not understand. Most feel that a
dependable radiation-monitoring instrument
has to be complex. However, especially during
a worseningnuclearcrisis manytypical Ameri-
cans would build KFMs if they become con-
vinced of the accuracy anddependabilityof this
homemakeable instrumentthattheycan under-
stand, use intelligently, and repairif necessary.
• Caution: Earlier versions of KFM-making
instructions, written when common sewing
threads were good insulators, recommend
sewing threads for suspendmg a KFM's leaves.
Nowmostsewingthreadsare anti-statictreated,
are poor insulators, and are unsatisfactory for
use in KFMs. Makers of KFMs should use the
instructionsinthisupdatededition,thatrecom-
mend widely available, excellent insulatorsfor
suspendinga KFM'sleaves,andthatincorporate
several field-tested design improvements.
• Instructions for Making and Using KFMs
Appendix C gives the latest field-tested
instructions (with patterns) to enable you to
make a KFM and to learn how to use it.
Thegreatneedforcivildefenseinstruments
is likely to be fully recognized only during a
worsening nuclear crisis. Therefore, in this
edition the KFM instructions and patterns are
printed on only one side of a sheet, with extra
patterns at the end of the text, and with two
pages at the very end to expedite the rapid
reproduction of the KFM instructions. Timed
printing tests by two newspapers have proved
that, with the help of these two pages of special
instructions, a newspaper can paste up and
photograph all pages of the KFM instructions,
print a 12-page tabloid giving them, and start
distributing the tabloid-all in less than one
hour. Thus, if you have a copy of this book
during an all-too-possible nuclear crisis, you
may be able to give these instructions to a
newspaper and help thousands of your fellow
citizensobtainthe informationthattheyneedto
make fallout meters for themselves.
• Advice on Building a KFM
The readerisurged to setaside several hours inthe
near future for making a KFM and for mastering its
use. Duringfield tests, average Americanfamilies have
needed about 6 hours to study the instructions given in
Appendix C, to make this simple instrument, and to
learn how to use it. These several hours may not be
available in the midst of a crisis. Higher priority work
would be the building of a high-protection-factor
shelter, the making of a shelter-ventilating pump, and
the storing ofadequate water. In a crisisitmight not be
possible to obtain some needed materials for a KFM.
It is very difficult to concentrate on unfamiliar
details during a nerve-racking crisis, or to do delicate
work with hands that may become unsteady. The best
time to build and learn to use a KFM is in peacetime,
long before a crisis. Then this long-lasting instrument
should be stored for possible future need.Chapter 11
Light
THE NEED FOR MINIMUM LIGHT
Numerous disasters have proved that many
people can remain calm for several days in total
darkness. But some occupants of a shelter ful1 of
fearful people probably would go to pieces if they
could see nothing and could not get out. It iseasy to
imagine the impact of a few hysterical people on the
other occupants of a pitch-dark shelter. 