95% of the area of the United States. However,
even in almost all areas not endangered by blast and
fire during a massive nuclear attack, the fallout
protection provided by mostexisting buildings would
not be adequate if the winds blew from the wrong
direction during the time of fallout deposition.
To remain in or near cities or other probable
target areas, one would need betterprotection against
blast, fire, and fallout than is provided by most
shelters in buildings. Blast tests have proved that the
earth-covered expedient fallout shelters described in
this book can survive blast effects severe enough to
demolish most homes.'
This chapter is concerned primarily with
expedient shelters that give excellent protection
against fallout radiation. These earth-covered fallout
shelters could be built in 48 hours or less by tens of
millions of Americans following field-tested, written
instructions." Expedient blast shelters are discussed
in Appendix D. The special blast doors and other
design features needed for effective blast protection
require more work, materials, and skill than are
needed for expedient fallout shelters.
If average Americans are to do their best when
building expedient shelters and life-support equip-
ment for themselves, they need detailed information
about what to do and about why it is to their
advantage to do it. We are not a people accustomed
to blindly following orders. Unfortunately, during a
crisis threatening nuclear war, it would take too long
to read instructions explaining why each important
feature was designed as specified. Therefore, only a
few reasons are included in the step-by-step,
illustrated instructions given in Appendix A for
building 6 types of earth-covered expedient shelters
during a crisis.
In this chapter, reasons will be given for design-
ing a Pole-Covered Trench Shelteras specified in the
Oak Ridge National Laboratory instructions given
in Appendix A.2. The two pages of drawings and
plans given at the end ofAppendix A.2 show the parts
of this' shelter, except for the essential shelter-
ventilating pump installed in its entrance trench. The
following account of how an urban family, after
evacuating, used these instructions to build such a
shelter in less than 36 hours also includes
explanations of various radiation dangers and of
simple means to build protection against these
dangers.
This family, like scores of other families
recruited to build shelters or life-support equipment,
was offered a sum aboutequivalent to laborers'wages
if its members completed the experiment within a
specified time. The test period began the moment the
family received the written, illustrated instructions
preparatory to evacuating by car, as mentioned in the
preceding chapter. Like the other test families, this
family was paid for all ofits materials used. Ifa family
worked hard and completed the project in half the
specified time, it was paid a cash bonus. Throughout
such tests workers were guided only by the written
instructions, which were improved after each
successive test.The successful outcome of almost all the shelter-
buildingexperiments indicatesthattens of millions of
Americans in a nuclear war crisis would work hard
and successfully to build earth-covered expedient
shelters that would give them better protection
against fallout, blast, and fire than would all but a
very small fraction of existing buildings. However,
this beliefisdependent on two conditions: (I) that ina
desperate, worsening crisis our country's highest
officials would supply strong, motivating leadership;
and (2) that Americans would have received-well in
advance-shelter-building and otherpractical, tested
survival instructions.
SHELTER AGAINST RADIAnON
The family previously pictured evacuatingbycar
(Fig. 4.3) drove 64 miles to build a shelter at the site
shown in Fig. 5.1. Although the August sun was very
hot in this irrigated Utah valley, the family members
did not build in the shade of nearby trees. To avoid
digging through roots, they carried the poles about
150 feet and dug their trench near the edge of the
cornfield.
The father and the oldest son did most of the
work of making the shelter. The mother and second
son had health problems; the two youngest children
were not accustomed to work.
The family followed an earlier version of the
plans and instructions given in Appendix A for
building a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. Because the
earth was firm and stable, the trenches were dugwith
vertical walls. 