
How to Make and Use a Homemade
Shelter-Ventilating Pump, the KAP
I. THE NEED FOR SHELTER AIR PUMPS
In warm weather, large volumes of outside air
MUST be pumped through. most fallout or blast
shelters ifthey are crowded and occupied for aday or
more. Otherwise, the shelter occupants' body heat
and water vapor will raise the temperature-humidity
conditions to DANGEROUSLY high levels. If
adequate volumes of outdoor air are pumped
through typical belowground shelters in hot weather,
many times the number of persons could survive the
heat than otherwise could survive in these same
shelters without adequate forced ventilation. Even-in
cold weather, about 3 cubic feet per minute(3cfm) of
outdoor air usually should be pumped through
shelters, primarily to keep the carbon dioxide
exhaled by shelter occupants from rising to harmful
concentrations.
The KAP (Kearny Air Pump) isa practical, do-
it-yourself device for pumping adequate volumes of
cooling air through shelters-i-with minimum work.
The following instructions have been improved
repeatedly after being used by dozens ofsmall groups
to build KAPs-inciuding families, pairs of house-
wives, and children. None of these inexpert builders
had previously heard of this kind of pump, yetalmost
all groups succeeded in making one in less than 4
hours after assembling the materials. Their successes
prove that almost anyone,ifgiven these detailed and
thoroughly tested instructions, can build a ser-
viceable, large-volume air pump of this simple type,
using only materials and tools found in most
American homes.
If possible, build a KAP large enough to pump
through your shelter at least 40 cubic feet per minute
(40 cfm) of outdoor air for each shelter occupant. If
40 cfm of outdoor air is pumped through a shelter
and distributed within it as specified below, even
under heat-wave conditionsthe effective temperature
of the shelter air will not be more than 2°F higher
than the effective temperature outdoors. (The
effective temperature is a measure of air's effects on
peopledue to its heat, humidity, and velocity.) The
36-inch-high by 29-inch-wide KAP described in these
instructions, if used as specified, will pump at least
1000 cfm of outside air through a shelter that has the
airflow characteristics outlined in these instructions.
If more than 25 persons might be expected to
occupy a shelter during hot weather, then it is
advisable to build a larger KAP. The 72-inch-high by
29-inch-wide model described can pump between
4000 and 5000 cfm.
To maintain tolerable temperature-humidity
. conditions for people in your shelter during hot
weather, you must:
• Pump enough outdoor air all the way through
the shelter (40 cfm for each occupant in very hot,
humid weather).
• Distribute the air evenly within the shelter. Ifthe
KAP that pumps air through the shelter does not
create air movement that can be felt inall parts of the
shelter in hot weather, one or more additional KAPs
will be needed to circulate the air and gently fan the
occupants.
• Encourage the shelter occupants to wear as little
clothing as practical when they are hot. (Sweat
evaporates and cools best on bare skin.)• Supply the occupants with adequate water and
salt. For prolonged shelter occupancy under heat-
wave conditions in a hot part of the country, about 4
quarts of drinking water and 113 ounce(1tablespoon)
of salt per person are required every 24 hours,
including salt in food that iseaten. Normal American
meals supply about 1/4ounce of salt daily. Salt taken
in addition to that in food should be dissolved in the
drinking water.
• Pump outdoor air through your shelter day and
night in warm weather, so that both the occupants
and the shelter are cooled off at night.
Almost all of the danger from fallout iscaused by
radiation from visible fallout particles of heavy, sand-
like or flakey material. The air does not become
radioactive due to the radiation continuously given off
by fallout particles.
The visible fallout particles rapidly "fall out" of
slow moving air. The air that a KAP pumps through
a shelter moves at a low speed and could carry into
the shelter only a very small fraction of the fallout
particles thatcause the radiation hazard outside. 