
blast, rather than fire. The house wasdemolished by the 5-psi overpressure blast that struck seconds later, but it
did not burn.
Fig. 7.2. Thermal radiation from a nuclear explosion enteredthe carabove through itsclosed windows and
ignited the upholstery. The windows wereblown out bythe blast afewseconds later. However, the explosion was
at such a distance that the blast wave was not severe enough to dent the car body.Earth-covered shelters can be protected against
heat radiation from nuclear explosions and other
causes by painting any exposed wood and other
combustible materials at shelter openings with a
thick coating of slaked lime (old-fashioned white-
wash). The World War II firebombing of Kassel was
less effective than were similar raids on other German
cities because the roof timbers of buildings had been
so treated."
Figure 7.3 illustrates the effectiveness of a thick
coating of slaked lime in protecting a rough pine
board against ignition by heat radiation. No flames
from the burning logs touched the board. (Before this
photograph was taken, the uppermost burning logs
of a vertical-sided pile were removed so that the
board could be seen clearly.)
Chinese civil defense instructions recommend
coating exposed wood with both slaked lime and
mud." If only mud is available, a coating of it
protects wood quite well. If kept damp, a mud
coating is even more effective. (Simply keeping all
exposed flammable materials damp is helpful.)
In blast areas, cloth or plastic canopies over the
openings of expedient shelters usually would be
ignited by the heat and certainly would be blown
away by even moderate blastwinds. Ifextra canopies
and stakes could be made and kept inside the shelter,
these replacements could be quickly erected after
blast winds subside and before fallout begins-at
least 15 minutes after the explosion. If no spare
canopies were available, it would be best to keep the
available canopies and their stakes inside the shelter,
if it were not raining.
FOREST AND BRUSH FIRES
Unless forests or brushy areas are dry, it is
difficult to start even scatteredfires. Dangerous mass
fires would be'unlikely, except in blast areas where
the heat radiation would be very intense. However,
people building a shelter would do well to select a
shelter site at least as far away from trees as the height
of the tallest tree that could fall on the shelter-be-
cause of fire and smoke hazards in dry weather, and
because digginga shelteramongtree roots isdifficult.
Fig. 7.3. Heat radiation had ignited the flaming half of the board on the ground, while the half nearthe
shovel-painted white with a thick coating of slaked lime-had not even begun to smoke.CAUSES OF FIRE
Figure 7.4 pictures the same house shown in Fig.
7.1 after it had been struck by the blast effects of a
small nuclear test explosion at the 5-psi overpressure
range. (Ifthe house had been hit by the blasteffects of
a multimegaton weapon, with longer-lasting blast
winds, it would have been wrecked about as
completely at the 3-psi overpressure range. At the
3-psi overpressure range.'the blast winds from an
explosion 1000times as powerful as the Nevada test
explosion that wrecked this house would blow 10
times as long. This longer-duration, 100-mph blast
wind would increase the damage done by the blast
wave. The 3-psi overpressure range from a 20-
megaton surface burst is about 10 miles from the
center of the crater, and from it one-megaton surface
burst, about 4 miles.")
If the blast-wrecked house shown in the
illustration had had a furnace in operation when it
was demolished, the chances of its being.set on fire
would have been high. In Hiroshima many ofthe first
fires resulted from secondary effects of blast,
especially the overturning of stoves, and not from
heat radiation. Although the air burst produced no
fallout, firefighters from undamaged, nearby com-
munities were unable to reach most of the burning
areas because of blast debris blocking the roads.
Later they were kept from burning areas by the
intense heat. Some water mains were broken, which
made water unavailable for firefighting in certain
areas.
In the event of an attack on the United States
employing many surface bursts, fallout would
prevent firefighting for days to weeks in a large part
of the most populated regions.
