other sources before buying.
To make sure that an advertised "one year
supply" of survival foods actually will keep an
adult well nourished for a whole year, require
the seller to inform you by mail what his "one
year supply" provides a typical adult male in:
(1) calories, k cal; (2) protein, g; and (3) fat, g.
Then you can use the values in the "Emergency
Recommendations" columninTable9.1 onpage
84 to determine whether the advertised "one
year supply" is adequate,• Transitional foods: The emotional shock of
suddenly being forced by war to occupy your
shelter will be even worse if you have to adapt
suddenlyto anunaccustomeddiet. Itwouldbe a
good idea to occasionally practice eating only
your survival rations for a day or two, and to
store in your shelter a two week supply of
canned and dry foods similar to those your
family normally eats. Then it will be easier if
war forces you to make the changeover. Of
course the transitional foods that you store
should be rotated and replaced as needed, de-
pending on their shelf lives.
• A hand-cranked grain mill: Whole kernel
grains and soybeans must be processed into
meal or flour for satisfactory use as principal
components of a diet. If unprepared America
suffers a nuclear attack, unplanned, local food
reserves and/or famine relief shipments will
consist mostly ofunprocessed wheat, corn, and
soybeans. Then a family with a manual grain
mill will have a survival advantage and will be
a neighborhood asset.
Manyhealthfoodstoresatleasthavesources
of hand-cranked grain mills. Mills with steel
grinding plates are more efficient and less
expensive than "stone" mills. A mailorderfirm
that still sells hand-cranked grain mills of a
makethatthe authorhasboughtandfound to be
wellmadeandefficientisMoses KountryHealth
Foods, 7115 W. 4th N.W., Albuquerque, New
Mexico 87107. It sells a serviceable Polish mill
(Model "OB" Hand Grain Mill) for $35.73 FOB,
plus UPS shipping charges. This mill cranks
easilyand grinds wheatintocoarsemealorfine
_flour more efficiently than any ofthe American
manual grain mills that the author has bought
and used over the decades. Apparently manual
grain mills no longer are manufactured in the
U.S. Before buying a grain mill be sure to learn
whetherit grinds corn, ourlargestfood reserve.
In 1987 the author bought an advertised West
German mill. Only after receiving it by mail
orderdidhelearn byreadingthe accompanying
directions that it is not made for grinding corn.
COOKING AND HEATING
• Safety precautions: The first rule for safe
cookingand/or heatingin a shelteris todo it as
near as practical to the exhaust opening. If the
fire isunderanexhaustpipe, install a hood over
the fire. Operate the shelter ventilating pump
when cooking, unless a natural airflow out
throughtheexhaustopeningcan be observedor
felt. Keepflammablematertals,especiallycloth-
ing, well away from any open fire.
• Hazardous fuels: Charcoal is the most haz-
ardous fuel to burn in confined spaces, because
itgivesoffmuchcarbonmonoxide.In a crowded
shelter there are obvious dangers in using the
efficient little stoves carried by backpackers
andinstoringtheireasilyvaporized andignited
fuels.
• "Canned heat": These convenient fuels are
expensive. Sterno, widely used to heat small
quantities offood and drink, typically retails in
7-ounce cans for what amounts to about $9.00
per pound.
• Wood: The safest fuel to burn in a shelter is
wood, the most widely available and cheapest
fuel. Furthermore, wood smoke is irritating
enough to usually alert shelter occupants to
some.times accompanying carbon monoxide
dangers. Scrap lumber cut into short lengths,
made into bundles and stored in plastic bags,
occupies minimum spaceand staysdry. Keep a
saw and a hatchet in your shelter.
• Bucket Stove: The most efficient, practical
and safe stove with which to cook or heat for
weeks or months in a family shelteris a Bucket
Stove, that burns either small pieces of wood or
small "sticks" of twisted newspaper. (See the
Food chapter.