 the cribs. For vertical brace-poles, use poles
with diameters of at least 2 in., cut off at the
height of the upper side of the uppermost
horizontal poles against which they are tied.
15. Be sure to cut off all limbs so that the poles are
quite smooth. Usually it IS easier to drag
smoothed poles to the buildingsite before cutting
them into the required lengths. Pull them by the
small, lighter ends.
16. Determine ifthere areenough long poles to make
the side-poles of the two cribs forming the sides
of the shelter room without splicing two shorter
poles together. If the shelter is being built for
more than 7persons. it will require side poles that
are longer than 151
2 ft. Therefore. if a shelter for
more than 7 persons is being built. it would be
best to use 2 cribs placed end-to-end on each side
of the shelter room. instead of a single crib as
illustrated by Fig. A.6.
17. Place the lowermost four poles of each of the
cribs in their final positions, so that all the bases
of the crib-walls are in position on the ground.
Use the thicker, heavier poles at and near the
bottom ofeach crib. BE SURE THE ROOM IS
LONG ENOUGH TO PROVIDE Il(z FT OF
ROOM LENGTH FOR EACH PERSON TO
BE SHELTERED.
18. To build each crib:
(I) Place two 311z-ft end-poles on the ground.
Put two of the side-poles on top of the two
end-poles so that the ends of all four poles
extend 3 in. (no more) beyond where they
cross. The thicker poles should be used first
to add stability.
(2) Stack additional pairs of end-poles and side-
poles to form the crib, keeping each wall of
the crib vertical, until the tops of the
uppermost side-poles areat least42 in. above
the ground. To keep the uppermost poles of
the crib about level while the crib is being
raised, alternate the large ends and small
ends of poles.
(3) Place a pair of small, vertical brace-poles in
each of the four corners ofthe crib. The tops
of the vertical brace-poles should be no
higher above the ground than the uppersides
of the crib's uppermost horizontal poles.
(4) Tie each pair ofvertical brace-poles together
tightly at bottom, middle, and top. Fortying,
use 3-ft lengths of strong wire, rope, or
slightly twisted, foot-wide strips of cloth at
least as strongas cotton bed sheeting. Square
knots with back-up overhand knots are best,
but three overhand knots-one on top ofthe
other-will hold.
(5) If the crib is more than 8 ft long, place an
additional pair of vertical brace-poles, with
one in position at the outside center of each
long crib-wall. Tie this pair ofvertical brace-
poles together permanently just above the
ground, but not yet in the middle or near the
top ofthe crib. Temporarily tie each of these
center vertical brace-poles to the uppermost
side-pole of the wall it touches.
(6) Line the crib with cloth or plastic film,
making sure that several inches of the lining
hangs over the uppermost poles. So that the
lining will not be pulled down when the crib
is being filled with earth, tie the upperedge ofthe lining to the uppermost wall pole about
every 2 ft. First cut a small hole through
which to thread a tie-string or a 2-in.-wide
tie-strip of cloth. (If plenty of cloth and/or
plastic isavailable for lining the cribs, secure
the lining by simply wrappinga greaterwidth
of the upper edge of the lining around the
uppermost crib wall-pole.)
(7) Permanently tie together the pair of vertical
center brace-poles, using horizontal ties at
their centers and just below the uppermost
horizontal wall-poles of the crib. Use the
strongest material you have for these
horizontal ties across the center of the crib.
(8) Excavate earth 10 ft or so beyond the outer
sides of the cribs. To save work, carry it in
buckets and dump it inside the cribs. (Two
children can carry a heavy bucket of earth by
running a strong, 4-ft stick through the bail
or handle of the bucket and tying the bail to
the center of the stick before lifting.