paper or thin cloth about 1/4inch wide by 2 inches
long. Put the strip in the spoon with an end hanging
down about 1/2 inch beyond the end of the spoon.
Then when bleach is placed in the spoon and the
spoon iscarefully tipped, drops the sizeof thosefrom
a medicine dropper will drip off the end of the strip.
As a second choice, 2%tincture of iodine can be
used. Add 5drops to each quart of clearwater, and let
stand 30 minutes." If the water is cloudy, add 10
drops to each quart. Commercial water purification
tablets should be used as directed.
If neither safe water nor chemicals for
disinfecting it are available during a crisis, store
plenty of the best water at hand-even muddy river
water. Most mud settles to the bottom in a fewdays;
even in a crowded shelter ways often could be found
to boil water. Bringing water to a boil for one minute
kills all types of disease-causing bacteria.i" Boiling
for 10 to 20 minutes is required to kill some rarer
infective organisms.
SOURCES OF WATER IN FALLOUT AREAS
Survivors of a nuclear attack should realize that
neither fallout particles nor dissolved radioactive
elements or compounds can be removed from water
by chemical disinfection or boiling. Therefore, water
should be obtained from the least radioactive sources
available. Before a supply of stored drinking water
has been exhausted, othersources should be located.
The main water sources are given below, with the
safest source listed first and the othersources listed in
decreasing order of safety.
1. Water from deep wells and from water tanks
and covered reservoirs into which no fallout particles
or fallout-contaminated water has been introduced.
(Caution: Although most spring waterwould be safe,
some spring water is surface water that has flowed
into and through underground channels without
having been filtered.)
2. Water from covered seepage pits or shallow,
hand-dug wells. This water is usually safe IF fallout
or fallout-contaminated surface water has been
prevented from entering by the use of waterproof
coverings and by waterproofing the surrounding
ground to keep water from running down outside the
well casing. Figure 8.9 is taken from a Chinese civil
defense manual." It shows a well dug to obtain safe
water from a fallout-contaminated source. If the
earth is not sandy, gravelly, or too porous, filtration
through earth is very effective.
3. Contaminated water from deep lakes. Water
from a deep lake would be much lesscontaminated by
dissolved radioactive material and fallout particles
than water from a shallow pond would be, ifboth had
the same amount of fallout per square foot ofsurface
area deposited in them. Furthermore, fallout parti-
cles settle to the bottom more rapidly in deep lakes
than in shallow ponds, which are agitated more by
wind.
4. Contaminated water from shallow ponds and
other shallow, still water.
5. Contaminated water from streams, which
would be especially dangerous if the stream ismuddy
from the first heavy rains after fallout is deposited.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------=-=--=-==--~~---.::=:--------
- -=.====------~~--....--~
Fig. 8.9. A water-filtering well. This Chinese
drawing specifies that this well should be dug 5 to 10
meters (roughly 5 to I0yards)from a pond or stream.WATER FROM WELLS
Fig. 8.10. Lower part of an expedient bail-can.
The unattached, "caged" valve can be made of a
material that does not have the springiness of soft
rubber.
The dangers from drinking fallout-
contaminated water could be greatly lessened by
using expedient settling and filtration methods to
remove fallout particles and most of the dissolved
radioactive material. Fortunately, in areas of heavy
fallout, less than 2% of the radioactivity ofthe fallout
particles contained in the water would become
dissolved in water.25 If nearly all the radioactive
fallout particles could be removed by filtering or
settling methods, few casualties would be likely to
result from drinking and cooking with most fallout-
contaminated water.
diameter of the well-casing pipe. A hole about I inch
in diameter should be cut in the center of the can's
bottom. The hole should be cut from the insideof the
can: this keeps the inside of the bottom smooth, so it
willserve as a smoothseatfor a practicallywatertight
valve. 