, firefighters from undamaged, nearby com-
munities were unable to reach most of the burning
areas because of blast debris blocking the roads.
Later they were kept from burning areas by the
intense heat. Some water mains were broken, which
made water unavailable for firefighting in certain
areas.
In the event of an attack on the United States
employing many surface bursts, fallout would
prevent firefighting for days to weeks in a large part
of the most populated regions.
The basements of many substantial buildings
will withstand 5-psi blast effects and can prevent
occupants from suffering serious injuries from blast.
Most home basements can be reinforced with stout
boards and posts so as to give good protection
against blast effects up to considerably. hig~er than
5 psi. But considering the dangers of fires III prob-
able blast areas, it is safer to build an earth-covered
shelter well removed from buildings than it is to
seek protection in shelters inside buildings.
CARBON MONOXIDE AND TOXIC SMOKE
If an undamaged building is burning, people
inside may be killed by carbon monoxide, toxic
smoke, or fiery-hot air. Tests have shown that even
fast-burning, rubble-free fires produce very high
concentrations of carbon monoxide. If large-scale
fires are burningneara shelter, the dangers from both
carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide may continue
for as long as 11/2 hoursafterignition.fTherefore, the
ventilation pipes or openings of a shelter should not
be placed close to a building that might be expected
to burn.
In the smoldering rubble of a large test fire, after
24 hours the carbon monoxide concentration was
still more than I% and the air temperature was
Fig. 7.4. Unburned wreckage of the same two-story, wood.-frame house pictured in Fig. 7.1 after being
wrecked by the 5-psi blast effects of a small nuclear test explosion,1900°F. A carbon monoxide concentration of only
0.08% (8 parts CO in 10,000 parts of air) will cause
headache, dizziness, and nausea in 45 minutes, and
total collapse in 2 hours.
Realization of carbon monoxide dangers to
persons in simple fallout shelters and basements may
have led the writers of Soviet civil defense publica-
tions to define the "zone of total destruction" as the
blast areas where the overpressure- exceeds 7 psi and
"residential and industrial buildings are completely
destroyed ... the rubble is scattered and covers the
burning structures," and "As a result the rubble only
smolders, and fires as such do not occur.,,23
Smoldering fires produce more carbon monoxide
than do fiercely burning fires. Whether or not the
occupants of basement shelters survive the direct
blast effects is of little practical importance in those
blast areas where the rubble overhead burns or
smolders. So in the "zone of complete destruction,"
Russian rescue brigades _plan to concentrate on
saving persons trapped inside excellent blast shelters
by the rubble.
About 135,000 Germans lost their lives in the
tragic city of Dresden during three days offirebomb
raids. Most casualties were caused by the inhalation
of hot gases and by carbon monoxide and smoke
poisoning.i" Germans learned that when these
dangers were threatening an air raid shelter, the
occupants' best chance ofsurvivalwas to run outside,
even if the bombs were still falling. But in a nuclear
war the fanout dose rate may be so high that the
occupants of a shelter threatened by smoke and
carbon monoxide might suffer a more certain and
worse death by going outside. Instead, if they know
from instrument readings and their calculations that
they probably would receive a fatal dose before they
could reach another shelter, the occupants should
close all openings as tightly as possible. With luck,
carbon monoxide in deadly concentrations would
not reach them, nor would they be overcome by heat
or their own respiratory carbon dioxide before the
fire dangers ended.
Dr. A.Broido, a leading experimenter with fires
and their associated dangers, reached this conclu-
sion: "If I were building a fallout shelter I would
spend a few extra dollars to build it in my backyard
rather than in my basement, locating the intake vent
as far as possible from any combustible material. In
such a shelter I would expect to survive anything
except the close-in blast effects.,,22
This advice also applies to expedient shelters
built during a crisis.