should be stored for possible future need.Chapter 11
Light
THE NEED FOR MINIMUM LIGHT
Numerous disasters have proved that many
people can remain calm for several days in total
darkness. But some occupants of a shelter ful1 of
fearful people probably would go to pieces if they
could see nothing and could not get out. It iseasy to
imagine the impact of a few hysterical people on the
other occupants of a pitch-dark shelter. Under
wartime conditions, evena faint light that shows only
the shapes of nearby people and things can make the
difference between an endurable situation and a
black ordeal.
Figure 11.1 shows what members of the Utah
family saw in their shelter on the third night of
occupancy. Al1 of the family's flashlights and other
electric lights had been used until the batteries were
almost exhausted. They had no candles at home and
Fig. 11.1. Night scene In a trench shelter
without light.
failed to bring the cooking oil, glass jar, and cotton
string included in the Evacuation Checklist. These
materials would have enabled them to make an
expedient lamp and to keep a smal1 light burning
continuously for weeks, if necessary.
At 2 AM on the third night, the inky blackness
caused the mother, a stable woman who had never
feared the dark, to experience her first claustro-
phobia. In a control1ed but tense voice she suddenly
awoke everyone by stating: "I have to get out of here.
I can't orient myself." Fortunately for the shelter-
occupancy experiment, when she reached the entry
trench she.overcame her fears and lay down to sleep
on the floor near the entrance.
Conclusion: In a crisis, it isespecial1y bad not to
be able to see at all.
ELECTRIC LIGHTS
Even in communities outside areas of blast, fire,
or fallout, electric lights dependent on the public
power system probably would fail. Electromagnetic
pulse effects produced bythe nuclearexplosions, plus
the destruction of power stations and transmission
lines, would knock out most public power.
No emergency lights are included in the supplies
stocked in official' shelters. The flashlights and
candles that some people would bring to shelters
probably would be insufficient to provide minimum
light for more than a very few days.
A low-amperage light bulb used with a large dry
cel1 battery or a car battery is an excel1ent source of
low-level continuous light. One of the smal1 12-volt
bulbs in the instrument panels of cars with 12-volt
batteries wil1 give enough light for 10 to 15 nights,without discharging a car battery so much that it
cannot be used to start a car.
Making an efficient battery-powered lighting
system for your shelter is work best done before a
crisis arises. During a crisis you should give higher
priority to many other needs.
Things to remember about using small bulbs
with big batteries:
• Always use a bulb of the same voltage as the
battery.
• Use a small, high-resistance wire, such as bell
wire, with a car ~attery.
• Connect the battery after the rest of the
improvised light circuit has been completed.
• Use reflective material such as aluminum foil,
mirrors, or white boards to concentrate a weak light
where it is needed.
• If preparations are made before a crisis, small
12-volt bulbs (0.1 to 0.25 amps) with socketsand wire
can be bought at a radio partsstore. Electric test clips
for connecting thin wire to a car battery can be
purchased at an auto parts store.
CANDLES AND COMMERCIAL LAMPS
Persons going to a shelter should take all their
candles with them, along with plenty of matches in a
waterproof container such as a Mason jar. Fully
occupied shelters can become so humid that matches
not kept in moisture-proof containers cannot be
lighted after a single day.
Lighted candles and other fires should be placed
near the shelter opening through which air is leaving
the shelter, to avoid buildup of slight amounts of
carbon monoxide and other headache-causinggases.
If the shelter is completely closed fora time for any
reason, such as to keep out smoke from a burning
house nearby, all candlesand otherfires inthe shelter
should be extinguished.
Gasoline and kerosene lamps should not be
taken inside a shelter. They produce gases that can
cause headaches or even death. 