 opening points down. With a strip of cloth
or a soft cord, bind and tie the folded-over partwith a
bow knot, as illustrated.Fig. 8.1. Carrying 80 pounds of water in two
burlap bags, each lined with two larger plastic trash
bags, one inside the other..
QRNl.owG 78-7106
Fig. 8.2. Folding and tying the mouth of a
water-filled plastic bag.
For long hikes, it isbest to tie the water-holding
plastic bags so that the openings 'are higher than the
water levels inside.
To transport this type of expedient water bag in
a vehicle, tie a rope around the fabric outer bag near
its opening, so that the rope also encircles and holds
the plastic liner-bags just below their tied-shut
openings. The other end of this rope should then be
tied to some support, to keep the openings higher
than the water level.
To use two fabnc bags or pillowcases to carry a
heavy load of water contained in larger plastic liner-
bags, connect the two fabric bags as shown in Fig. 8.1.
A small pebble, a lump of earth, or a similar
object should be tied inside the opening of each bag
before the two are tied together, to hold them
securely. The bag that isto be carried in front should
have the pebble tied about 4 inches further down
from the edge of its opening than the pebble tied in
the bag to be carried in back. This keeps the pebbles
from being pressed against the carrier's shoulderbya
heavy load.
A pair of trousers with both legs tied shut at the
bottoms. can be used to carry a balanced load if
pillowcases or other fabric bags are notat hand. Such
a balanced load can be slung over the shoulder with
the body erect and less strained than if the same
weight were carried in a single bag-like pack on the
back. However, trouser legs are quite narrow and do
not provide room to carry more than a few gallons.
To prevent water from slowly leaking through
the tied-shut openings of plastic bags, the waterlevels
inside should be kept below the openings.
STORING WATER
When storing expedient water bags in a shelter,
the water levels inside should be kept below the
openings.
.Not many expedient shelters would be large
enough to store an adequate volume of water for an
occupancy lasting two or more weeks. Plastic-lined
storage pits, dug in the earth close to the shelter, are
dependable for storing large volumes of water using
cheap, compact materials. Figure 8.3 shows a
cylindrical water-storage pit dug so as to have a
diameter about two inches smaller than the inflated
ORNL-DWG 77-i0423R
WIRE HOOP TAPED
INTO FOLDED- OVER
EDGE OF 30-gol
POLYETHYLENE
TRASH BAG
(lB in. DIAM IF
FULLY EXPANDED).
DOUBLE BAGS
ARE BETTER.
Fig. 8.3. Vertical section of cylindrical water-
storage pit lined with two 30-gallon waterproof
plastic bags. This pit held about 20 gallons.diameter of the two 30-gallonpolyethylenetrash bags
lining it (one bag inside the other). Before a plastic
bag is placed in such a pit, the ends of roots should be
cut off flush to the wall with a sharp knife, and sharp
rocks should be carefully removed.
The best way to keep the upper edges of the pit-
lining bags from slipping into the pit isshown in Fig.
8.3: Make a circular wire hoop the sizeof the opening
of the bag, and tape it inside the top. In firm ground,
the upper edges of double bags have been
satisfactorily held in place simply bystickingsix large
nails through the turned-under edges of the bags and
into the firm earth.
Figure 8.3 shows how to roofand cover a water
storage pit so as to pr.otect the water. The "buried
roof" of waterproof material prevents any contami-
nation of the stored water by downward-percolating
rainwater, which could contain bacteria or small
amounts of radioactive substances from fallout. The
thick earth cover over the flexible roofing gives'
excellent blast protection, due to the earth arching
that develops under blast pressure. 