
in the 1986 summerissueof Foreign Affairs,the
prestigiousquarterlyof the CouncilonForeign
Relations. The authors, Starley L. Thompson
and Stephen H. Schneider, are atmospheric
scientists with the National Center for Atmos-
pheric Research. They showed " . . . that on
scientific grounds the global apocalyptic con-
clusionsof theinitialnuclearwinterhypothesis
can nowberelegatedto a vanishinglowlevel of
probability." Their models indicate that in July
(when the greatest temperature reductionswould result) the average temperature in the
United States would be reduced for a few days
from about 70 degrees Fahrenheit to approxi-
mately 50 degrees. (In contrast, underthe same
conditions Carl Sagan, his associates, and the
Russian scientistspredicteda resultingaverage
temperature of about 10 degrees below zero
Fahrenheit, lasting for many weeks!)
Persons who want to learn more about
possiblepost-attackclimaticeffects alsoshould
read the Fall 1986 issue of Foreign Affairs. This
issue containsa longletterfrom Thompson and
Schneider which further demolishes the theory
of catastrophic "nuclear winter." Continuing
studies indicate there will be even smaller
reductions intemperaturethanthosecalculated
by Thompson and Schneider.
Soviet propagandists promptly exploited
belief in unsurvivable "nuclear winter" to
increase fear of nuclear weapons and war, and
to demoralize their enemies. Because raging
city firestorms are needed to inject huge
amounts of smoke into the stratosphere and
thus, according to one discredited theory, pre-
vent almost all solar heat from reaching the
ground, the Soviets changed their descriptions
of how a modern city will burn if blasted by a
nuclear explosion.
Figure 1.6 pictures how Russian scientists
andcivildefenseofficialsrealisticallydescribed
- beforetheinventionof "nuclearwinter" - the
burning of a city hit by a nuclear weapon.
Buildings in the blasted area for miles around
ground zero will be reduced to scattered rubble
- mostly of concrete, steel, and other non-
flammable materials - that will not burn in
blazing fires. Thus in the Oak Ridge National
Laboratorytranslation (ORNL-TR-2793) of Civil
Defense, SecondEdition(500,000copies),Moscow,
1970, by Egorov, Shlyakhov, and Alabin, we
read: "Fires do not occur in zones of complete
destruction . . . that are characterized by an
overpressure exceeding0.5 kg/cm2 [- 7 psi] ...
becauserubbleisscatteredandcoverstheburn-
ing structures. As a result the rubble only
smolders, and fires as such do not occur."
Translation: [Radioactive] contamination occurs in the area of the explosion and also
along the trajectory of the cloud which forms a radioactive track.
Fig. 1.6. Drawing with Caption in a Russian Civil Defense Training Film Strip. The
blazing fires ignited by a surface burst are shown in standing buildings outside the
miles-wide"zoneof completedestruction," wherethe blast-hurled"rubbleonlysmolders."Firestorms destroyed the centers of Ham-
burg, Dresden, and Tokyo. The old-fashioned
buildingsofthosecitiescontainedlargeamounts
of flammable materials, were ignited by many
thousands of small incendiaries, and burned
quickly as standing structures well supplied
with air. No firestorm has ever injected smoke
into the stratosphere, or caused appreciable
cooling below its smoke cloud.
The theory that smoke from burning cities
and forests and dust from nuclear explosions
would cause worldwide freezing temperatures
was conceived in 1982 by the German atmos-
pheric chemist and environmentalist Paul
Crutzen, and continues to be promoted by a
worldwide propaganda campaign. This well
funded campaign began in 1983 with televised
scientific-political meetings in Cambridge and
Washington featuring American and Russian
scientists. A barrage of newspaper and maga-
zine articles followed, including a scare-
mongering article by Carl Sagan inthe October
30, 1983 issue ofParade, the Sundaytabloidread
by millions. The most influential article was
featured intheDecember23, 1983issueofScience
(theweekly magazineofthe AmericanAssocia-
tion for the Advancement ofScience): "Nuclear
winter, globalconsequencesofmultiplenuclear
explosions," byfive scientists, R. P. Turco, O. B.
Toon, T. P. Ackerman, J. B. 