sthan 2days. The
only families who took longer- up to 4 days were
the few who were delayed by very heavy rains. Each
of these shelters has been built by several different
families or groups of families. Only widely available
materials and hand tools are required. They have
been built under simulated crisis conditions in
environments typical of large regions of the United
States: covered-trench types have been built in
forested clay hills of Tennessee. in a bare Colorado
\ alley in snowy November. inan irrigated Utah valley
in hot August. Most ofthe aboveground shelters were
built by families in Florida. where the water table is
within 18 inches of the surface.
All of these test families used instructions that
contained general guidance to help inexperienced
persons build almost any type of earth-covered
shelter. In this appendix. general instructions which
apply to all types of shelters will be given first. to
avoid repetition. (However. if the instructions for
building one type of shelter are reproduced
separately. the pertinent parts of these general
instructions should be given before the step-by-step
instructions for building that shelter.
WARNING
Earth-covered shelters built of green poles
canbecomeunsafe withina few months, because
of fungi and/or boring insects. In damper parts
of the U.S., earth-covered shelters built of dry
poles or untreated lumber can become unsafe
after several months. An exception is very dry
areasoftheWest, where some pioneers livedfor
years in earth-covered dugouts with pole roofs.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING
AN EXPEDIENT SHELTER
I. Read all the instructions and study the drawings
before beginning work. (Most families have
found it helpful first to read the instructions
aloud and then to discuss problems and work
assignments.)
2. Sharpen all tools, including picks and shovels.
Dull tools waste time and energy. If no file is
available, tools can be sharpened by rubbing
them hard on concrete or a rough stone.
3. Wear gloves from the start. Blisters can lead to
serious infections, especially ifantibiotics cannot
be obtained.'
4. Whenever practical, select a building site that:
• Will not be flooded if heavy rains occur or if
a large dam farther up a major valley isdestroyed
by a nuclear explosion.
• Is in the open and at least 50 ft away from a
building or woods that might be set afire by the
thermal pulse from an explosion tens of miles
away. (Keep well away from even a lone tree; it is
hard to dig through roots.)
• Has earth that is firm and stable, if the
planned shelter is to be a trench type with
unshored (unsupported) earth walls. To make
sure that the earth is firm and stable enough so
that the walls will not cave in, make a "thumb-
test" by digging an l8-in.-deep hole and trying to
push your bare thumb into the undisturbed earth
at the bottom. If you can push your thumb no
farther than I in., the earth should be safe
enough. If the earth does not pass the thumb-test,
move to another location and repeat the test. Or
build a belowground shelter with shored walls,
or an aboveground shelter.
• Has a sufficient depth ofearth above rock or
the water table for a trenchto be dug to the depthrequired. (To find out, try to dig a pit to the
required depth before excavating the whole
trench. Or, ifyou are quite sure there isno water-
table problem, try driving down a sharpened rod
or pipe to the required depth in several places
along the planned length of the trench.)
5. If the shelter must be built on sloping ground,
locate it with its length crosswise to the direction
of the slope.
6. Before staking out the shelter, clearthe ground of
brush, weeds and tall grass over an area
extending about 10 ft beyond the planned edges
of the excavation. (If loose earth isshoveled onto
tall plants, the earth will be difficult to shovel the
second time when coveringthe completed shelter
roof.)
7. Stake out the complete shelter, and then dig by
removing layers of earth.
8. When digging 'earth that is too firm to shovel
without first breaking it up, start picking (or
breaking with a shovel) in aline across the center
of the trench. Next, shovel out a narrow trench 6
or 8 in. deep all the way across the width of the
trench. 