WALLS
BASEMENT
FLOOR
Fig. 5.8. Supporting beam and one of its posts
installed to increase the load of shielding material
that can be carried safely by the floor above a
home basement.
Cut posts to fitexactly underthe beam. Iftrees at
least 4 inches in diameter are not available, make
posts by nailing boards together. Position the two
outermost posts within 2 feet of the ends of the beam.
Space the posts at even intervals, with each post
under a floor joist. A post under every third joist is
ideal; this usually means a spacing between posts of
about 41(2 feet. Ifthe basement is20 feet long, 5 posts
are enough. Nail each post to the beam, and secure
the bases of each with brace boards laid on the
basement floor, as illustrated.
Finally, place a second l-foot-thick layer of
earth on the floor above. Ifthe basement windowsare
protected with boards and if all but a part of one
window and all the aboveground parts of the
basement walls are covered with earth 2feet thick, the
basement shelter will have a protection factor of
several hundred against fallout radiation.
Adequate ventilation and cooling should be
assured by using a homemade air pump (a KAP),
made and installed as described in Appendix B.
Forced ventilation is especially necessary if more
than one family occupies the basement in warm or
hot weather.
More work and materials are. required to
improve a home basement in this manner than are
needed -to build a covered-trench shelter for one
family. An earth-covered shelter separate from
buildings will provide equally good protection
against radiation, better protectionagainst blast, and
much better protection against fire.
If a family cannot build a separate, earth-
covered shelter outdoors, often it would be advisable
to make a very small shelter in the most protected
corner of the basement. Such an indoor shelter
should be of situp height (about 40 inches for tall
people) and no wider than 3 feet. Its walls can readily
be built of chairs, benches, boxes, and bureau
drawers. Interior doors make an adequately strong
roof. Expedient shielding materials, to be placed on
the roof and the two exposed sides, can be ordinary
water containers and bureau drawers, boxes, and
pillow cases filled with earth orotherheavy materials.
Or, if heavy-duty plastic trash bags or 4-mil
polyethylene film are available, make expedient
water containers and use them for shielding. To do
so, first line bureau drawers, boxes, pillow cases,
trash cans, etc. with plastic. Place the lined containers
in position to shield your shelter, then fill these
expedient water containers with drinkable water (see
Chapter 8).
As demonstrated by hot-weather occupancy
tests of such very small indoor shelters, a small KAP
or other air pump must be operated to maintain a
forced flow of air through such a crowded shelter, to
prevent intolerable temperature-humidity
conditions. (See Chapter 6 for ventilation-cooling
requirements, including the provision of an
adequately large opening in each end of a shelter.) In
some basements a second small KAP would be
needed in hot weather to pump outdoor air through
the basement. This KAPcould be operated by pullinga cord from within the small shelter, using an
improvised "pulley" as described in Appendix B.
PUBLIC SHELTERS
In the event of an unexpected attack, many
unprepared Americans should and would take refuge
in nearby marked public shelters. Throughout the
populated areas that would not be subjected to blast,
fire. or heavy fallout, the use of public shelters could
save millions of lives. All persons concerned with
survival should remember that the large majority of
officially surveyed and marked shelters give better
protection against radiation than most unimproved
home basements..
Persons preparingto go to publicshelters should
be aware that many lack forced ventilation and that
the blowers and fans of most forced ventilation
systems would be stopped by loss of electric power
due to electromagnetic pulse effects or by other
effects of nuclear explosions on electrical systems. A
blast wave at an overpressure range as low as I psi
(144 pounds per square foot) would wreck most
shelter-ventilating fans. In 1987, no water or food
normally is stocked. 