 netting or window screen to
cover the openings, if mosquitoes or fliesare
likely to be a problem.
4. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP.
5. Wear gloves from the start-even tough hands
can blister after hours of chopping and digging,
and become painful and infected.
6. Ifpossible, select a location for the shelter that is
in the open and at least 50 ft from a building or
woods. Remember that on a clear day the
thermal pulse (flash of heat rays) from a very
large nuclear explosion may cause fires as far
away as 25 miles,
7. If the site chosen is on a steep slope, locate the
shelter with its length crosswise to the direction
of the slope.
8. Stake out the outlines of the trench, driving
stakes as indicated in Fig. A.2.1 at the end of
Appendix A.2. If more than 4 persons are to be
sheltered, increase the length of the shelter room
by 2 ft 9 in. for each additional person.
9. Clear the ground of saplings and tall grass within
10 ft of the staked outlines so that later the
excavated earth can be easily shoveled back onto
the completed shelter roof.
10. Start digging, throwing the first earthabout 10ft
beyond the staked outlines of the trench. Less
able members of the family should do the easier
digging, near the surface. Those members who
can use an ax and saw should cut and haul poles.
See the introductory section of this appendix for
the know-how to make this hard work easier.
II. Pile all excavated earth at least 2 ft beyond the
edges of the trench, so roofing poles can be laid
directly on the ground. To make sure that the
. trenches are dug to the specified full widths at the
bottoms, cut and use two sticks-one 42 in. long
and the other22 in. long-to check trench widths
repeatedly.
12. At the far end of-the shelter dig the ventilation
trench-emergency exit, making it 22 in. wide and
40 in. deep. This will help provide essential
ventilation and cooling. In cold weather or when
fallout is descending, canvas or plastic curtains
should be hung in the two openings to controlthe
air flow.
13. Make and install threshold boards, to keep the
edges of earth steps and earth ledges from being
broken off. (In damp earth, it is best to install
threshold boards before roofing the shelter.) If
boards are lacking, use small poles.
14. Unless the weather is cold, build a shelter-
ventilating pump-a KAP 20 in. wide X 36 in.
high. (Ifthe weather is cold, building a KAP can
be safely delayed until after the shelter is
completed.) A KAP should be made before a
crisis, or, if possible, before leaving home.
15. Obtain fresh-cut green poles, or, as a second
choice, sound, dry, untreated poles. Useno poles
smaller in diameter than those specified in the
accompanying drawings. For ease in hauling,
select poles no more than 50% larger in diameter
than those specified.16. Lay the poles side by side over the trench.
Alternate the large and small ends to keep the
poles straight across the trench. If roof poles 9 ft
long are being used to roof a 5-ft-wide trench, be
sure to place the roof poles so that their ends
extend 2 ft farther beyond one side of the trench
than beyond the other side. This will enable
shelter occupants, after the stoop-in shelter is
completed, to widen the shelter room 2 ft on one
side. First. it can be widened to provide a 2-ft-
wide sleeping ledge. Later, it can be further
deepened to make space for additional expedient
hammocks or for double-bunk beds of poles or
boards built on each side of the shelter.
17. For ease and safety laterwhen hangingexpedient
bedsheet-hammocks and bedsheet-chairs in the
completed shelter, place loose loops around roof
poles in the approximate locations given by the
diagram on the second shelter drawing, Fig.
A.2.2. Make these loose loops of rope, or strong
wire, or 16-in-wide strips of strong cloth, such as
501;( polyester bedsheet rolled up to form a
"rope". (For making hammocks and seats, see
Chapter 14. These are not essential, although
decidedly useful.