. retaliatory actions by producing
heavy local fallout.
Today few if any of Russia's largest inter-continentalballisticmissiles (ICBMs) arearmed
with a 20-megaton warhead. A huge Russian
ICBM, the SS-18, typically carries 10 warheadseach having a yield of 500 kilotons, each pro-
grammed to hit a separate target. See Jane's
Weapon Systems, 1987-1988. However, in March
1990 CIA Director William Webstertold the U.S.Senate Armed Services Committee that"...The
USSR's strategic modernization program con-tinues unabated," and that the SS-18 Mod 5 cancarry 14 to 20 nuclear warheads. The warheads
are generally assumed to be smaller than thoseof the older SS-18s.
• Myth: So much food and waterwillbepoisoned by
fallout that people will starve and die even in fallout
areas where there is enough food and water.
• Facts: Ifthe fallout particlesdo not become mixed
with the parts of food that are eaten, no harm isdone.
Food and water in dust-tight containers are not con-
taminated by fallout radiation. Peeling fruits and vege-
tables removes essentially all fallout, as does removing
the uppermost several inches of stored grain onto
which fallout particles have fallen. Water from many
sources - such as deep wells and covered reservoirs,
tanks, and containers - would not be contaminated.
Even water containing dissolved radioactive elements
and compounds can be made safe for drinking by
simply filtering it through earth, as described later in
this book.
• Myth: Most of the unborn children and grand-
children of people who have been exposed to radiation
from nuclearexplosions willbegenetically damaged -
will be malformed, delayed victims of nuclear war.
• Facts: The authoritative study by the National
Academy of Sciences, A Thirty Year Study of the
Survivors ofHiroshima and Nagasaki, was published
in 1977.Itconcludesthatthe incidence ofabnormalities
is no higher among children later conceived by parents
who were exposed to radiation during the attacks on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki than is the incidence of
abnormalities among Japanese children born to un-
exposed parents.
This is not to say that there would be no genetic
damage, nor that some fetuses subjected to large
radiation doses would not be damaged. But the
overwhelmingevidence does show thatthe exaggerated
fears of radiationdamage to future generationsare not
supported by scientific findings.
• Myth: Overkill would result if all the U.S. and
U.S.S.R. nuclear weapons were used - meaning not
only that the two superpowers have more than enough
weapons to killall of each other's people, but also that
they have enough weapons to exterminate the human
race.• Facts: Statements that the U.S. and the Soviet
Union have the power to kill the world's population
several times over are based on misleading calculations.
One such calculation isto multiply the deaths produced
per kiloton exploded over Hiroshima or Nagasaki by
an estimate of the number of kilotons in either side's
arsenal. (A kiloton explosion is one that produces the
same amount ofenergy as does 1000tons ofTNT.) The
unstated assumption is that somehow the world's
population could be gathered into circular crowds,
each a few miles in diameter with a population density
equal to downtown Hiroshima or Nagasaki, and thena
small (Hiroshima-sized) weapon would be exploded
over the center of each crowd. Other misleading
calculations are based on exaggerations of the dangers
from long-lastingradiationand otherharmfuleffectsof
a nuclear war.
• Myth: Blindnessand a disastrousincreaseof
cancers would be the fate of survivors of a
nuclear war, because the nuclear explosions
would destroy so much of the protective ozone
inthe stratospherethatfar too muchultraviolet
light would reach the earth's surface. Even
birds and insects would be blinded. Peoplecould
not work outdoors in daytime for years without
dark glasses, andwouldhavetowearprotective
clothing to prevent incapacitating sunburn.
Plants would be badly injured and food produc-
tion greatly reduced.
• Facts: Large nuclear explosions do inject
huge amounts of nitrogen oxides (gasses that
destroy ozone) into the stratosphere. 