 the
shelter.
The 6-member Utah family described in preced-
ing chapters used a home-like expedient toiletduring
their 77-hour shelter stay. Figure 12.2 pictures the
toilet seat they took with them, placed on a hose-
Fig. 12.1. A 5-gallon paint can used for a hose-
vented toilet-can, with a plastic trash bag for its
removable liner.
vented container in a hole in the ground. The toilet
was at one end ofthe shelter. A person sitting on this
toilet could put his feet in the adjacent "stand-up
hole" aoR be more comfortable.
The blanket shown hanging on the left in
Fig. 12.2 could be drawn in front of the toilet for
privacy. Behind the girl's head was the emergency
crawlway-ventilation trench. When the toilet was
being used, the shelter-ventilating KAP pumped air
under the blanket-curtain and out the ventilation
trench, resulting in very little odor in the rest of the
shelter.
Vomiting is certain to cause both morale and
health problems, especially for unprepared shelter
occupants fearing this first dramatic symptom of
radiation sickness. Nervousness, combined with the
effects of unaccustomed food and water, will cause
even some healthy persons to vomit. In a crowded
shelter, the sight and smell ofvomit will make others
throw up. Plastic bags, well distributed throughout a
shelter, are the best means to catch vomit and keep itFig. 12.2. The hose-vented expedienttoiletused
by the Utah family for over3days. (The unconnected
telephone was brought along as a joke.)
off the floor. Buckets, pots, or a newspaper folded
into a cone also will serve.
DISPOSAL OF DEAD BODIES
In large shelters which are occupied for many
days, someone may die even when no occupants have
been injured by blast, fire, or radiation. The sight or
the sickly-sweet stink of a decaying human pody is
greatly disturbing. Some civil defense workers have
theorized that the best way to take care of a corpse in
a shelter until the fallout dose-rate outdoors is low
enough to allow burial is to seal it in a large plastic
bag. A simple test with a dead dog proved this idea
impractical: gas pressurecaused the bag to burst. One
solution is to put the corpse outside as soon as the
odor is evident. First, if possible, place it in a bag
made of large plastic trash bags taped together and
perforated with a few pinholes.
CLEAN WATER AND FOOD
Disinfecting water by boiling (preferably for at
least 10 minutes) or by treating it with chlorine or
iodine has been described in Chapter 8, Water.
When water is first stored, it should be dis-
infected by the addition of I scant teaspoon of
ordinary household bleach for each 10 gallons.
To avoid contaminating water when removing
small quantities from a container such as a
waterproofbag, the simplestway isfirst to pour some
into a pot or other medium-sized container, from
which small amounts can be poured into individual
cups. Dipping water with a cup runs more risk of
contamination. The cleanest way to take small
quantities of water out of a container is to siphon it
with a flexible tube, as described in Chapter8, Water.
Sanitary storage of food in expedient shelters is
often difficult. Although almost any paper or plastic
covering will keep fallout particles from food, shelter
dampness can cause paper containers to break. Ants,
roaches, and weevils can cut through paper or plastic
coverings to reach food inside. Placing paper
containers offood in plastic bags and suspending the
bags from the ceiling of the shelter entryway gives
good protection against bugs, and quitegood protec-
tion against moisture for a few weeks. (Do not
obstruct the air flow through an entryway if heat isa
problem.) A small amount of insect repellent or
grease smeared on the suspending string or wire will
stop all crawlers. Metal and strong plastic containers
with tight lids protect food best.
The hygienic preparation and serving of food in
a shelter, especially in hot weather, require that all
cooked food beeaten promptly. It isbest to eatwithin
half-an-hour after cooking. Canned foods should be
consumed shortly after opening. The cleaning and
disinfecting of utensils, bowls, etc.