 area were found to be 12 R/hr
and if a person remained exposed in that particular area for 24 hours, he
would receive a dose of 288 R(12 R/hr x 24 hr =288 R). Even assuming
that this person had beenexposed previously to very little radiation, there
would stilI be a serious risk that this 288 Rclosewould be fatal under the
difficult conditions thatwould fol1ow a heavy nuclear attack.
D. Estimating the Dangersfrom Different Radiation Doses
z
~c::ng
zY'
~
~
IVIVI
C\I,...
C)
a..
C\I,...
C)
a..To control radiationexposureinthis way,eachshelter must havea fallout meter,
and a daily record must bekept ofthe approximate total dose receivedeach day
by every shelter occupant, both while inside and outside the shelter. The long-
term penalty which would result from a dose of 100 R received within a few
weeksismuch lessthan many Americans fear. If 100average persons receivedan
externaldose of 100Rduring and shortly after a nuclear attack, thestudies ofthe
Japanese A-bomb survivors indicate that no more than one of them islikelyto
die during the following 30years as a result of this 100R radiation dose. These
delayed radiation deaths would be due to leukemia and other cancers. In the
desperate crisis period following a major nuclear attack, such a relatively small
shortening of life expectancy during the following 30 years should not keep
people from starting recovery work to save themselves and their fellowcitizens
from death due to lack of food and other essentials.
A healthy person who previously has received a total accumulated dose of no
more than 100R distributed over a 2-week period should realize that:
100R,evenifall receivedina day or less,isunlikely to require medical care
- provided during the next 2weeksatotal additionaldose ofno more thana
few R is received.
350 R received in a fewdays or lessresults in a 50-50 chance of being
fatal after a large nuclearattack whenfewsurvivors could get medical care,
sanitary surroundings, a well-balanced diet, or adequate rest.
600 R receivedina fewdays or lessisalmostcertainto cause death within a
few days.
E. Finding the Protection Factor of a Shelter
To avoid the necessity of repeatedly going outside a shelter to
determine the changing dose rates outside, find the shelter's protec-
tion factor (PF) by measuring the dose rate inside the shelter as soon
as it becomes high enough to be reliably measured. Then promptly
measure the dose rate outside. The uncontaminated shelter's
PF = Dose Rate Outside
Dose Rate Inside
An example: If the dose rate inside is found to be 0.2 Rlhr and the
'dose rate outside is 31 Rlhr, the shelter's
PF = 31 Rlhr =155
0.2 Rlhr
Then at future times the approximate dose rate outside can be
found by measuringthe dose rate inside and multiplyingitby 155.
Approximate Dose Rate Outside =Dose Rate Inside x PF.
F. Using a KFM to Reduce Radiation Doses Received
If a charged KFM is discharged and reads zero within a secondor
two after being taken outside a good shelter, this means that the
dose rate outside is hundreds of roentgens per hour. Get back
inside! Also remember that a 15-second reading is not as accurate
as are readings made in longer specified exposure times.
Inside most shelters, the dose received by an occupant varies considerably,
depending on the occupant's location. For example, inside an expedient
covered-trenchshelterthedose rate ishigher near theentrancethan inthe middle
of the trench. In a typical basement shelter the best protection is found in one
corner. Especiallyduring the first several hours after thearrivaloffallout, when
the dose rates and doses receivedare highest, shelter occupants should use their
fallout meters todetermine whereto placethemselvesto minimizethe dosesthey
receive.
They should useavailable tools and materials to reduce the doses they receive,
.especially during the first day, by digging deeper (if practical) and reducing the
size of openings by partially blocking them with earth, water containers, etc.
- while maintaining adequate ventilation. 