-
ventingfatalities ifit isbuilt with strongexpedient blast
doors; it isstilIquitegood ifbuilt withoutthem. (These
instructionsare for fallout shelters. Theinstructionsfor
making blast doors and other essentials for adequate
blast protection are given in Appendix D. Without
blast doors, occupants are likely to suffersert-
ous injuries above 7 psi.)
Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant
from fires that produce carbon monoxide and toxic
smoke.
WHERE PRACTICAL
In wooded areas with small trees, for builders who
have a saw (bow saw, crosscut, or chain saw) and
digging tools. Any location is suitable if the necessary
poles may be obtained there. Try to avoid roots.
For belowground, semiburied, or aboveground
construction. (However, aboveground construction
requires the excavation and movement of so much
earth that it is not practical for 2-dayconstruction by
families with only hand tools.)
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
For families or othergroups with most members
able to work hard 12 hours a day for 2 days. (Most
people do not realize how hard and long they can
work if given a strong incentive.)
The drawingsand lists ofmaterials given in these
instructions are for a 12-person shelter. For each
additional occupant beyond 12,add 1ft to the length
of the shelter room.
This shelter requires less work and materials per
occupant if its room is sized for about 24 persons,
because the entrances are the same regardless of the
length of the room. (To make the shelter room twice
as long, each ofthe horizontal, ladder-like braces on
the floor and near the ceilingofthe roomcan be made
with two poles on a side, rather than one long pole on
a side.)
If the room is sized for more than 24 people,
management and hygiene problems become more
difficult when it is occupied.
For 12people to live for manydays in this shelter
without serious hardship, the benches and bunks
must be built with the dimensions and spacingsgiven
in the illustration. Or, materials must be available for
making and suspending 12 expedient bedsheet-
hammocks that can be converted each day into 12
bedsheet-chairs.
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
1. Study both of the two drawings (Fig. A.3.1
and A.3.2 at the end of Appendix A.3) and read
all of these instructions before beginning
work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP WHEN
COMPLETED.
2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed (1) a ventilating pump (a KAP 24 in
wide and 36 in. high), essential except in cold
weather, and (2) the storage of at least 15gallons
of water per occupant.3. Start to assemble the required materials. For
building a 12-person Small-Pole Shelter, the
materials are:
• Nails, wire, and/or cord: Ten pounds of
40-penny nails plus 4 pounds of 16-penny nails
are ideal. However, 7 pounds of 16-penny nails
can serve.
• Green poles. No pole should have a
small end of less diameter than the minimum
diameter specified for its use by Figs. A.3.1 and
A.3.2. The table below lists the number and sizes
of poles needed to build a 12-person Small-Pole
Shelter.
'To be shortened to fit for crossbraces.
'Width equals the distance measured across a single layer of poles
when a sufficient number of poles are laid on the ground side by side
and touching, to cover a rectangular area.
'For supports during construction.
NOTE: The above list does not include flooring materials. to be
placed between the poles of the ladder-like braces on the earth floor.
Quantity
2
2
I
2
3
2
I
I
Tools
Ax, long-handle
Bow-saw, 28-in.
(or 2-man crosscut saw)
Pick.
Shovel, long-handle
Claw hammer
File, 10-in.
Steel tape, IO-ft
(Also useful: a 50-ft steel tape and 2 hatchets)
• Materials to build a homemade ventilat-
ing pump (a KAP 24in. wide and 36in. high-see
Appendix B) and to store at least 15 gallons of
water per occupant (see Chapter 8).
4. Desirable muscle-powered tools for building a
12-person, Small-Pole Shelter are listed below.
