 15 gallons '
water per occupant. (See Chapter 8.)
• A total of 30 square yards of rainpro '
ing materials for the illustrated 5-pers (
shelter, and 3 square yards for each ad 5
tional person to be sheltered. (Even ti t
plastic will serve to make a rainproofvburs
roof.")
• Additional saws and shovels, chain sa
pick-mattock, hammer, hatchet.
• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil-to keep
hand-saw from sticking in gummy wood.
• A file.
• Two additional double-bed sheets I
person, or equivalent square-yardage
other equally strong fabric or plastic.
• A measuring tape, yardstick, or rule
• Old newspapers (about 15 pounds).
6. Wear gloves from the start. Even tough haP
can blister and become painful and infected aU
hours of digging and chopping. a
IT
7. Select a shelter location where there islittle oib
chance of the ground being covered with woi
by a hard-rain. ill
I
5. To save time and work, SHARPEN At
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP. 0
• A knife.
• A minimum of 300 ft of wire at least as
strong as clothesline wire. Second choice
would be 300 ft of rope, or (third choice) 8
double-bed sheetsthatcould be torn into I-ft-
wide strips and twisted slightly to serve as
rope. For each additional person beyond 5,
supply 20 ft of wire or rope or halfa double-
bedsheet.
• Rainproof roofing materials-at least 2
square yards per person. Such materials as
plastic film, shower curtains, plastic table-
cloths or plastic mattress covers can be used.
These materials are essential for prolonged
shelter occupancy in rainy, cold weather.
• Fifteen double-bed sheets (or equal
square-yardage of other strong cloth or
plastic).
• Materials for building a ventilating
pump, a KAP 20 inches wide and 30 in. high.
(See Appendix 8.)
• A saw (preferably a bow saw with an
extra blade, or a crosscut saw) and!or an·
ax-for cutting green poles.
• A shovel (one for each two workers is
desirable).
• A pick (if the ground is very hard).
• Two to five large cans, buckets, and!or
pots with bail handles, in which to carry earth
and to store water or wastes later.8. If the building site is near the edge of a woods,
pick a site at least 40 ft from the nearest trees-to
avoid roots.
9. Clear off grass, weeds, etc., from the area where
you plan to build the shelter-this also will help
to avoid chiggers or ticks. Do not remove any
earth.
10. Stake out the entire shelter, locating the 6
required cribs. BE SURE TO MAKE THE
INSIDE LENGTH OF THE MAIN ROOM
EQUAL TO THE NUMBER OF PERSONS
TO BE SHELTERED MULTIPLIED BY Illz
FT. The illustrated shelter issized for 5 persons,
and the poles listed are those required for this
5-person shelter.
II. While some persons are staking out the shelter,
others should be cutting green poles and hauling
them to the site. Cut poles with tops no smaller
than the diameters specified. (Note: the specified
diameters do not include bark.)
12. Select poles with small-end diameters no more
than 509C larger than the specified minimum
diameters. to make handling of the longwall and
roof poles easier.
13. Sort the poles by length and diameter and lay ail
poles of each size together. near the excavation.
14. Use larger trees and poles, up to 6in. in diameter,
to make the 31
z-ft-Iong end-poles of the cribs
(Fig. A.6). Do not use poles with small-end
diameters of less than 3 in. for the side-wall poles
of the cribs. For vertical brace-poles, use poles
with diameters of at least 2 in., cut off at the
height of the upper side of the uppermost
horizontal poles against which they are tied.
15. Be sure to cut off all limbs so that the poles are
quite smooth. Usually it IS easier to drag
smoothed poles to the buildingsite before cutting
them into the required lengths. Pull them by the
small, lighter ends.
16. 