 3-foot thickness of earth
shown (or a 2-foot thickness ofconcrete) willprovide
an effective barrier, attenuating (absorbing) about
99.9% of all gamma rays from fallout. (In the
illustration, only a single fallout particle 3 feet from
the edge of the trench is considered.) Only one
gamma ray oui of 1000could penetrate the 3 feet of
earth shown and strike the person in the trench. Rays
from particles farther away than 3 feet would be
negligible; rays from particlescloserthan 3feet would
be attenuated according to the thickness of earth
between the fallout particleand the man in.the trench.
However, the man in the trench would not be
protected from "skyshine," which is caused by
gamma rays scattering after striking the nitrogen,
oxygen, and other atoms of the air. The man's
exposed head, which is just below ground level,
would be hit byabout one-tenthas manygamma rays
as if it were 3feet above ground (Fig. 5.3). Even ifall
fallout could be kept out ofthe trench and off the man
and every part of the ground within 3feet of the edges
of the trench, skyshine from heavy fallout on the
surrounding ground could deliver a fatal radiation
dose to the man in the open trench.
Skyshine reaches the ground from alldirections.
If the man were sitting in a deeper trench, he would
escape more of this scattered radiation, but not all of
it. For good protection he must be protected
overhead and on all sides by barrier shielding.
The barrier shielding of the Pole-Covered
Trench Shelter shown in Fig. 5.4 was increased by
shoveling additional earth onto its "buried roof."
After father and son had mounded earth about 18
inches deep over the centerline of the roof poles, a
large piece of 4-mil-thick polyethylene was placed
over the mound. This waterproofmaterialserved as a
"buried roof" after it was covered with more earth.
Any rainwater trickling through the earth above the
plastic would have run off the sloping sides of the
"buried roof" and away from the shelter.
• Geometry shielding reduces the radiation dose
received by shelter occupants by increasing the
distances between them and fallout particles, and by
ORNL-DWG 78·7205
Fig. 5.3. Simplified illustration of barrier shielding and skyshine (scattered gamma radiation). An open
trench provides poor protection.Fig. 5.4. Increasing the barrier shielding over a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter.
providing turns in the openings leading into the
shelter. Figure 5.5 isa sectionaldrawingof the shelter
entry built by the Utah family.
The farther you can keep away from a source
either of light or of harmful radiation, the lesslight or
other radiation will reach you. If fallout particles are
on the roof of a tall building and you are in the
basement, you will receivea much smaller radiation
dose from those particles than if they were on the
floor justabove you. Likewise, ifeithervisible light or
gamma rays are comingthroughan openingat the far
end of a passageway, less will reach you at the other
end if the passageway is long than if it is short.
Turns in passageways are very effective in
reducing the amount of radiation entering a shelter
through them. A right-angle turn, either from a
vertical or horizontal entry, causes a reduction of
about 90%.
Note: Fallout shelters need not provideadditional
shielding to protect occupants against initial nuclear
radiation that is emitted from the fireballs of nuclear
explosions. (See Figs. 1.I and 1.4.) Large nuclear
weapons would beemployed inan attack on the United
States. The initial nuclear radiation from the
sizes of explosions that may endanger Amer-
icans would be greatly reduced in passing
through the miles of air between the fireballs
and those fallout shelters far enough away to
survive the blast effects. The smaller an explo-
sion, the larger the dose of initial nuclear
radiation it delivers at a given blast overpres-
sure distance from ground zero. (For a discussion
of the more difficult shielding requirements of blast
shelters that would enable occupants to survive blast
effects much closer to explosions and therefore would
besubjected to much larger exposures of initial nuclear
radiation, see Appendix D, Expedient Blast Shelters.)
Figure 5.