 filtering or
settling methods, few casualties would be likely to
result from drinking and cooking with most fallout-
contaminated water.
diameter of the well-casing pipe. A hole about I inch
in diameter should be cut in the center of the can's
bottom. The hole should be cut from the insideof the
can: this keeps the inside of the bottom smooth, so it
willserve as a smoothseatfor a practicallywatertight
valve. To cut the hole, stand the can on a flat wood
surface and press down repeatedly with the point ofa
sheath knife, a butcher knife, or a sharpened
screwdriver.
The best material for the circular, unattached
valve shown in Fig. 8.10 is soft rubber, smooth and
thin, such as inner-tube rubber. Alternately, the lid of
a can about 3/4inch smaller in diameter than the bail-
can may be used, with several thicknesses of plastic
film taped to its smooth lowerside. Plasticfilm about
4 mils .thick is best. The bail (handle) of a bail-can
should be made of wire, with a loop at the top to
which a rope or strong cord should be attached.
Filling-time can be reduced by taping half-a-
pound of rocks or metal to the bottom of the bail-can.
REMOVING FALLOUT PARTICLES AND
DISSOLVED RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
FROM WATER
• Filtering
Filtering through earth removes essentiallyall of
the fallout particles and more of the dissolved
radioactive material than does boiling-waterdistilla-
tion, a generallyimpractical purification method that
does not eliminate dangerous radioactive iodines.
Earth filters are also more effective in removing
radioactive iodines than are ordinary ion-exchange
water softeners or charcoal filters. In areas of heavy
fallout, about 99% of the radioactivity in watercould
be removed by filtering it through ordinary earth. To
make the simple, effective filter shown in Fig. 8.11,
the only materials needed are those found in and
TAPE
ORNL·DWG 78-6691 R
CIRCULAR. UNATTACHED.
VALVE ABOUT 3/4 in. LESS
IN DIAMETER THAN THE
CAN
lWO
STOP·
WIRES
AT RIGHT
ANGLES
The wells of farms and rural homes would be the
best sources of water for millions of survivors.
Following a massive nuclear attack, the electric
pumps and the pipes in wellsusuallywould be useless.
Electric power in most areas would be eliminated by
the effects of electromagnetic pulse (EMP) from
high-altitude bursts and by the effects of blastand fire
on power stations, transformers, and transmission
lines. However, enough people would know how to
remove these pipes and pumps from wellsso that bail-
cans could be used to reach water and bring up
enough for drinking and basic hygiene:
How to make a simple bail-can is illustrated in
Fig. 8.10. An ordinary large fruit-juice can willserve,
if its diameter is at least I inch smaller than the
CAN
The first runoff will contain most of the radioactive
material that can be dissolved from fallout particles
deposited on the drainage area." Runoff after the
first few heavy rains following the deposit of fallout is
not likely to contain much dissolved radioactive
material, or fallout.
6. Water collected from fallout-contaminated
roofs. This would contain more fallout particles than
would the runoff from the ground.
7. Water obtained by melting snow that has
fallen through air containing fallout particles, or
from snow lying on the ground onto which fallout has
fallen. Avoid using such water for drinking or
cooking, if'possible.
WIRE
THROUGH
SMALL
NAIL HOLES
A CAN TOP
WITH 4-mil
PLASTIC FILM
TAPED ON.
FOR TIGHT
SEAL lOR A
PIECE OF
INNERTUBE
RUBBER IEXPEDIENT FILTRATION
Fig. 8.11. Expedient filter to remove
radioactivity from water.
3. Cover the pebbles with one thickness of
terrycloth towel, burlap sackcloth, or other quite
porous cloth. Cut the cloth in a roughly circular
shape about 3 inches larger than the diameter of the
can.
4. Take soil containing some clay-almost any
soil will do-from at least 4 inches below the surface
of the ground. (Nearly all fallout particles remain
near the surface except after deposition on sand or
gravel.