 distance between its
two rubber bumpers. To save energy especially when pumping air
through a high resistance ventilation system, move the piston back
and forth by using mostly your leg and body muscles.
PROLONGED STORAGE
Wipe offall greaseand other lubricants ifyoudo not plan to use this
pump for months. All lubricants-especially those on wood-tend to
become gummy with time.
Keep your supply of pump lubricants taped to your pump.
REQUEST
Suggestions for improving this pump and/or these instructions will
be appreciated, and may contribute to improvements likely to save
lives.
Cresson H. Kearny
Copyright © 1986 by Cresson H. Kearny
No part of this work (except brief passages that a reviewer may
quote in a review) may be reproduced in any form unless the
reproduction includes the following statement:"Copyright © 1986by
Cresson H. Kearny. All or part of this information on the Plywood
Double-Action Piston Pump may be reproduced without obtaining
permission from anyone."FILTER BOX AND FILTER
PURPOSES
The primary shelter ventilation requirement is to supply enough
outdoor air to maintain endurable heat-humidity conditions.
Tokeep the concentration ofrespiratorycarbon dioxide lowenough
for survival, very little fresh outdoor air is required. Even for an
infant or an infirm person remaining in a crowded shelter for days, 3
cubic feet per minute(3cfm) isadequate. Fora healthy adultor child
1.5cfm is enough. Too much carbon dioxide, not too little oxygen, is
the initial causeofunendurableconditions in inadequatelyventilated
shelters in which the air does not get unendurably hot.
In contrast, up to 25cfrn ofoutdoorair per occupant may be needed
to maintain endurable heat-humidity conditions inside a crowded
shelter occupied for days during a heat wave in a hot, humid part of
the U.S. Hence the need for a large-volume ventilating pump, best
with a low-resistance filter.
Ifoutdoorairflows into ashelterthrough-a hood,gooseneck pipe, or
other air-supply opening that causes all but tiny fallout particles to
fall out before the air reaches shelter occupants, breathing this
unfiltered air will not result in short-term radiation casualties.
However, a very small fraction ofthe occupants ofa shelter supplied
with unfiltered air in an area of heavy fallout may contract cancer
years later as a resultof breathing shelter air containing tiny fallout
particles, that a properly designed filter could have removed.
Air that has been in contact with fallout particles before being
filtered is not radioactive.
The homemade filter illustrated below, if used with an efficient
"suction" pump such as the Plywood Double-Action Piston Pump
described separately, will remove practically all fallout particles
likely to cause casualties even decades later. This filter also will
remove most infective aerosols, the air-borne tiny particles used in
biological warfare - an unlikely type ofattack on the United States.
It will not remove poisonous gasses, an even less likely danger to
Americans if all-out war befalls us.
CONSTRUCTION
Filter Box
If20 x 20-inch furnace filters are available, use plywood or boards
to build the filter box shown in the illustration. To make permanent
connections airtight, first use waterproof construction adhesive or
glue, and then tape. (If only smaller filters are available, reduce the
horizontal dimensions of the box accordingly, except for the top and
bottom openings.) Check to be sure that your filters will fit snugly in
the box of the size you plan to build.
The square frame on the bottom of the filter box should fit snugly
over the square air-intake duct on the top of your Plywood Double-
Action Piston Pump. Tape the cracksto makethe connection airtight
and to permit easy removal of the filter box.
Make the illustrated 4 supports of the hardware cloth no thicker
than 3/4 inch, thus providing enough space'below the filter for low-
resistance airflow. (Hardware cloth is a stiff, square-mesh, molten-
dipped galvani-zed wire.)
Make the square top of the filter box so that it covers the upper
edges of the box's sides and can be easily removed. Then cut in its
centera round holeslightlysmallerthan 4inches indiameter. File the
hole'sedgessothata4-inch-diametercan (such as acoffeecan with its
top and bottom cut out) fits snugly in this hole. 