
published in 1979.
The average American has far too little informa-
tion that would help him and his family and our
country survive a nuclear attack, and many of his
beliefsabout nuclearwar are bothfalseand dangerous.
Since the A-bomb blasted Hiroshima and hurled
mankind into the NuclearAge,only duringa recognized
crisis threatening nuclear war have most Americans
been seriously interested in improving their chances of
surviving a nuclear attack. Both during and following
the Cuban MissileCrisis in 1962, millions of Americans
built fallout shelters or tried to obtain survival infor-
mation. At that time most of the available survival
information was inadequate, and dangerouslyfaulty in
some respects - as it still is in 1987. Widespread
recognition of these civil defense shortcomings has
contributed to the acceptance by most Americans of
one or both of two false beliefs:
One of these false beliefs isthat nuclear war would
be such a terrible catastrophe that it isan unthinkable
impossibility. If this were true, there would be no
logical reason to worry about nuclear war or to make
preparations to survive a nuclear attack.
The second false beliefisthat, ifa nuclearwar were
to break out, it would be the end of mankind. If this
were true, a rational person would not try to improve
his chances of surviving the unsurvivable.
This book gives facts that show these beliefs are
false. History shows that once a weapon is invented it
remains ready for use in the arsenals of some nations
and in time will be used. Researchers who have spent
much time and effort learningthe facts about effects of
nuclear weapons now know that all-out nuclear war
would not be the end of mankind or of civilization.
Even ifour country remained unprepared and were to
besubjected to an all-out nuclearattack, many millions
of Americans would survive and could livethrough the
difficult post-attack years.WHY YOU AND YOUR FAMILY AND
ALMOST ALL OTHER AMERICANS ARE
LEFT UNPROTECTED HOSTAGES TO THE
SOVIET UNION
Unknown to most Americans, our Govern-
ment lacks the defense capabilities that would
enablethe UnitedStatestostopbeingdependent
on a uniquely American strategic policy called
MutualAssuredDestruction(MAD).MADmain-
tains thatif boththe UnitedStatesandRussiado
not or can not adequately protect their people
andessentialindustries,thenneitherwillattack
the other.
An influential minority of Americans still
believethat protectingourcitizens andourvital
industries would accelerate the arms race and
increase the risk of war. No wonder that Presi-
dentReagan's advocacyofthe StrategicDefense
Initiative, derisively called Star Wars, is sub-
jected to impassioned opposition by those who
believethat peaceisthreatenedevenbyresearch
to develop new weapons designed to destroy
weapons launched against us or our allies! No
wonder that even a proposed small increase in
funding for civil defense to save lives if deter-
rence fails arouses stronger opposition from
MAD supporters than do most much larger
expenditures for weapons to kill people!
RUSSIAN, SWISS, AND AMERICAN
CIVIL DEFENSE
No nation other than the United States has
advocated or adopted a strategy that purposely
leaves its citizens unprotected hostages to its
enemies. The rulers of the Soviet Union never
have adopted a MAD strategy and continue to
prepare the Russians to fight, survive, and win
all types of wars. Almost all Russians have
compulsory instructionto teach them aboutthe
effects of nuclear and other mass-destruction
weapons, and whatthey can do to improve their
chances of surviving. Comprehensive prepara-
tions have been made for the crisis evacuation
of urban Russians to rural areas, where they
and ruralRussians wouldmakehigh-protection-
factor expedient fallout shelters. Blast shelters
to protect millions have been built in the cities
and near factories where essential workers
would continue production during a crisis.
Wheat reserves and other foods for war sur-
vivors have been stored outside target areas.
About 100,000 civil defense troops are main-
tained for control, rescue, and post-attack re-
covery duties. The annual per capita cost of
Russian civil defense preparations, if made at
costs equivalentto those inthe United States, is
variously estimated to be between $8 and $20.
Switzerland has the best civil defense sys-
tem, one that already includes blast shelters for
over85 percent of all its citizens. 