 Aboveground, Ridgepole Shelter.Appendix A.6
Aboveground, Crib-Walled Shelter
PROTECTION PROVIDED
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor200
(PF 200) if the earth-filled cribs are built to the full
width of 3 ft, as illustrated in Fig. A.6 at the end of
these instructions. (A person in the open outside this
shelter would receive about200 times as much fallout
radiation as he would if inside.) If earth is mounded
to the top of the walls and 3 ft deep over the roof, the
protection factor can be raised to PF 500 or better.
See the accompanying drawing at the end of
Appendix A.6.
Against blast: Better protection than most
homes. Without blast doors, occupants could be
injured-although probably not fatally-at lower
overpressure ranges than those that would destroy
this shelter.
Against fire: Poor, if the shelter is built as
illustrated. The cloth and outer poles would be
unprotected from thermal pulse and other possible
sources of intense heat. However, ifearth ismounded
around the walls so as to cover all exposed cloth and
wood, good fire protection would be provided.
WHERE PRACTICAL
The crib-walled shelter is practical in many
wooded areas and whenever enough poles are
available, or in locations where belowground
expedient shelters are impractical because the water
table or rock is too close to the surface for a covered-
trench shelter.
FOR WHOM PRACTICAL
For a family or group with three or more
members able to work very hard for most of48 hours.
An unskilled family with an ax or saw and materials
found in most American homes can build this shelter.
No nails are required. (Groups with the nails, tools,
skill, and the number of workers required to build a
RidgepoleShelterare advised to do so; a Crib-Walled
Shelter requires almost twice the total length of poles
and more work to provide shelter for a given number
of persons.)
CAPACITY
The shelter illustrated in Fig. 6.1 isthe minimum
length for 5 persons. For each additional person, add
Ilh ft to the length of the room. (If more than about
12 persons are to be sheltered, build 2 or more
separate shelters.)
BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
I. Before beginning work, study the drawing and
read ALL of the following instructions.
2. Divide the work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP
WHEN COMPLETED.
3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have
completed a ventilatingpump (a KAP 20in. wide
and 26 in. high, essential for this shelterexcept in
cool weather) and the storage of at least 15
gallons of water per occupant. (See Appendix B
and Chapter 8.)
4. Start to assemble materials and tools.
A. Essential Materials and Tools
• Poles. (Fresh-cut, green poles are best;
sound, untreated poles are satisfactory.) For
the illustrated 5-person shelter, the required
poles are listed on the following page.Minimum Diameter of Number of Width When All
Use Pole Length Small End Poles Are Laid on
Required the Groun<f
Sidesof longest crib 12~ ft 3 in. 7ft
Sides ofmiddle-sized
crib 10ft 3 in. 7ft
Sidesofshortest crib 7ft 3 in. 7ft
Ends ofall cribs 3~ ft 3 in. 2Ift
Vertical poles at the
comers ofall cribs 3~ ft 2 in. 56
Mainroof 9ft 3~in. 12ft
Entryway roofs 5 ft. 2~in. 22 ft
a
This 'width is the distance measured across a singlelayer ofpoles when a sufficient number ofthem are
laid on the ground side by side and touching, with large ends and small ends alternating so as to cavera rec-
tangular area.
B. Useful Materials and Tools
• Containers for storing 15 gallons '
water per occupant. (See Chapter 8.)
• A total of 30 square yards of rainpro '
ing materials for the illustrated 5-pers (
shelter, and 3 square yards for each ad 5
tional person to be sheltered. (Even ti t
plastic will serve to make a rainproofvburs
roof.")
• Additional saws and shovels, chain sa
pick-mattock, hammer, hatchet.
