
probable source, and quickly get behind anything
that will shield you from most of the thermal pulse's
burning heat and intense light. A thermal pulse
delivers its heat and light for several seconds-for
more than II seconds ifit isfrom a I-megaton surface
burst and for approximately 44 seconds if from a 20-
megaton surface burst.
If you are at home when you see the amazingly
bright light, run out of rooms with windows. Hurry
to a windowless hallway or down into the basement.
If you have a shelterclose to your house, but separate
from it, do not leave the best cover in your home to
run outdoors to reach the shelter; wait until about
two minutes after first seeing the light.
If outdoors when you see the bright light, get
behind the best available cover.
It would be impossible to estimate the distance
to an explosion from its light or appearance, so you
should stay under cover for about two minutes. A
blast wave initially travels much faster than the
normal speed of sound (about 1 mile in 5 seconds).
But by the time its overpressure has decreased to I
pound per square inch (psi), a blast wave and its
thunderous sound have slowed down and are moving
only about 3C/c faster than the normal speed of sound.If no blast or sound reaches you in two minutes,
you would know that the explosion was over 25miles
away and you would not be hurt by blast effects,
unless cut by shattered window glass. After two
minutes you can safely leave the best cover in your
home and get a radio. Turn the dial to the stations to
which you normally listen and try to find informa-
tion. Meanwhile, quickly make preparations to go to
the best shelter you and your family can reach within
15 minutes-the probable time interval before the
first ICBMs start to explode.
At no time after an attack begins should you
look out of a window or stay near a window. Under
certain atmospheric conditions, windows can be
shattered by a multimegaton explosion a hundred
miles away.
• The sound of explosions. The thunderous
booms of the initial SLBM explosions would be
heard over almost all parts of the United States.
Persons one hundred miles away from a nuclear
explosion may receive their first warning by hearing
it about 71 2 minutes later. Most would have time to
reach nearby shelter before the ICBMs begin to
explode.
• Loss of electric power and communications. If
the lights go out and you find that many radio and TV
stations are suddenly off the air, continue to dial if
you have a battery-powered radio, and try to find a
station that is still broadcasting.
HOW TO RESPOND TO ATTACK WARNINGS
DURING A WORSENING CRISIS
Ifan attack takes place duringa worseningcrisis,
the effectiveness of warnings would be greater. Even
if ovr government did not order an evacuation of
high-risk areas, millions of Americans would already
have moved to safer areas if they had learned that the
enemy's urban civilians were evacuating or that
tactical nuclear weapons were being employed over-
seas. Many prudent citizens would sleep inside the
best available shelter and stay in or near shelter most
of their waking hours. Many people would have
made or improved family or small-groupsheltersand
would have supplied them with most essentials. The
official warning systems would have been fully
alerted and improved.
During such a tense crisis period, neighbors
or people sheltered near each other should have
someone listen to radio stations at all times of the
day and night. Ifthe situation worsened or an attack
warning were broadcast, the listener could alert the
others.
One disadvantage of waiting to build expedient
shelters until there is a crisis is that many of the
builders are likely to be outdoors improving their
shelters when the first SLBMs are launched. The
SLBM warheads may arrive so soon that the civilian
warning systems cannot respond in time. To reduce
the risk of being burned, persons working outdoors
when expecting an attack should wear shirts, hats,
and gloves. They shouldjump into a shelteror behind
a nearby shielding object at the first warning, which
may be the sudden cut-off of some radio
broadcasts.
REMAINING INSIDE SHELTER
Curiosity and ignorance probably will cause
many people to come out of sheltersa fewhours after
an attack warning, if no blast or obvious fallout has
endangered their area. This is dangerous, because
several hours after almost all missiles have been
launched the first enemy bombers may strike. 