 pieces ofhulls from the coarser
Fig. 9.I. Sieving ground barleythrougha window-
screen sieve.meal and the larger pieces. The sieve was made of
a piece of window screen that measured 20 X 20
inches before its sides were folded up and wired to
form an open-topped box.
To lessen their laxative effects, all grains should
be ground as finely as possible, and most of the hulls
should be removed. Grains also willbedigested more
easily if they are finely ground. The occupants of
crowded shelters should beespeciallycareful to avoid
foods that cause diarrhea.
COOKING WITH MINIMUM FUEL
In areas of heavy fallout, people would have to
remain continuously in crowded shelters for many
days. Then they would have to stay in the shelters
most of each 24 hours for weeks. Most shelter
occupants soon would consume all of their ready-
to-eat foods; therefore, they should have portable,
efficient cook stoves. A cook stove is important for
another reason: to help maintain morale. Even in
warm weather, people need some hot food and drink
for the comforting effect and to promote a sense
of well-being. This is particularly true when people
are under stress. The Bucket Stove pictured on the
following pages (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3) was the most
satisfactory of several models of expedient stoves
developed at Oak Ridge and later field-tested.
• Bucket Stove
If operated properly, this stove burns only about
I, pound of dry wood or newspaper to heat 3quarts
of water from 60°F to boiling.
Materials requiredfor the stove:
* A metal bucket or can, 12- to 16-quart sizes
preferred. The illustrations show a 14-quart bucket
and a 6-quart pot.
• Nine all-metal coat hangers for the parts
made of wire. (To secure the separate parts of the
movable coat-hanger wire grate, 2 feet of finer wire
is helpful.)
• A 6 X lO-inch piece of a large fruit-juice
can, for a damper.
Construction:
With a chisel (or a sharpened screw driver) and
a hammer, cut a 41 , X 4lh-inch hole in the side of
the bucket about II., inches above its bottom. To
avoid denting the side of the bucket when chiseling
out the hole, place the bucket over the end of a logor
similar solid object.
To make the damper, cut a 6-inch-wide by
lO-inch-high piece out of a large fruit-juice can or
from similar light metal. Then make the two coat-
hanger-wire springs illustrated, and attach them to
the piece of metal by bending and hammering the
outer I inch of the two 6-inch-Iong sides over and
around the two spring wires. This damper can be slid
up and down, to open and close the hole in the
bucket. The springs hold it inany desired position. (If
materials for making this damper are not available,
the air supply can be regulated fairly well by placing
a brick, rock, or piece of metal so that it will block
off part of the hole in the side of the bucket.)
To make a support for the pot, punch 4 holes
in the sides of the bucket, equally spaced around it
and about 31/2 inches below the bucket's top. Then
run a coat-hanger wire through each of the two pairs
of holes on opposite sides of the bucket. Bend these
two wires over the top of the bucket, as illustrated, so
that their four ends form free-ended springs to hold
the cooking pot centered in the bucket. Pressure on
the pot from these four free-ended, sliding springs
does not hinder putting it into the stove or taking
it out.
Bend and twist 4 or 5 coat hangers to make the
movable grate, best made with the approximate
dimensions given in Fig. 9.2.
For adjusting the burning pieces offuel on the
grate, make a pair of 12-inch-Iong tongs of coat-
hanger wire, as illustrated by Fig. 9.3.
To lessen heat losses through the sides and
bottom of the bucket, cover the bottom with about
I inch of dry sand or earth. Then line part of the inside
and bottom with two thicknesses of heavy-duty
aluminum foil, if available.
