duringthe
entire return stroke. Or, if the pulley is not overhead,
operate the KAP by swinging your extended arm
back and forth from the shoulder;
B. Placement to Take Advantage of the
Natural Direction of Air Flow
A KAP can pump more air into a shelter if it is
installed so that it pumps air through the shelter in
the direction in which the air naturally flows. Since
this direction can be reversed by a wind change
outdoors. it isdesirable to provide a way to quickly
remove your pumpand reposition it so that air can be
pumped in the opposite direction. This can bedone in
several ways. including making one set of quick-
removal brackets for one air openingand a second set
for the other.
C. Maintenance
To operate your KAP efficiently, keep the flaps
in good repair and make sure that there is the
minimum practicalarea of openspaces inand around
the KAP through which air can flow back around the
pump frame, opposite to the pumped direction. So
keep at least some extra flap material in yourshelter,
along with some extratape and the fewtoolsyou may
need to make repairs.
VII. NARROW KAPs AND SMALL KAPs
A. Narrow KAPs
To swing efficiently in an entrance or emergency
exit of an expedient trench shelter that is22 in. wide,
a KAP isbest made 20in. wide and 36in. high. One of
less height is not as efficient as a 36-in.-high model
and has to be pulled uncomfortably fast. So, when
ventilation openings can be selected or made at least
38 in. high, make your pump 36 in. high.
In a narrow trench shelter, it is best to have the
pull-cord run the full length of the trench, along the
trench wall that occupants will face when sitting.
Then each occupant can take a turn pullingthe pump
without having to change seats.
Good metal hinges on a narrow KAP allow it to
swing properly if pulled with the pull-cord attached
to one side of the frame. (Pumps with improvised
hinges and large pumps must be pulled from a
connection point on their center vertical brace to
make them swing properly.) Therefore, if you have
small metal hinges and need a KAP no wider than 20
inches, build a rectangular frame without a vertical
center brace. Make two pull-cord attachment points,
one on each side of the frame and each 9inches below
the top of the frame. (Fora small KAP, a satisfactory
attachment point can readily be made by drivingtwo
nails so that their heads cross, and wiring them
together.) Then if a change in wind direction outside
causes the direction of natural air flow in the trench
to become opposite to the direction in which air is
being pumped, you can move your KAP to the
opening at the other end of the trench. The pull-cord
can easily be connected to the otherside of the frame,
and convenient pumping can be resumed quickly.So that the horizontal support board can be
nailed easily to the roofing poles or boards ofan entry
trench, it is best to use cabinet hinges. Screw them
onto an edge of the support board, in the ,1.H~Lus.ual,
OUT-OF-LINE POSITION shown in Fig. 20. This
hinge connection allows (he pump to swing a full 180
degrees. To facilitate moving the horizontal support
board, connect it to the roofwith a fewsmall nails, so
that it can be pulled loose easily and quickly.
ORNL-DWG 78-10358
ROOF POLES
HORIZONTAL
SUPPORT BOARD
Fig. 20.
B. Small KAPs
Ifthe only available opening inwhich a KAP can
be installed is small, build a KAP to fit it. Use
narrower boards to make the frame and make the
flaps of thinner material, such as the polyethylene of
large plastic trash bags. For pumps 24 inches or less
in height, make the finished flaps only 31/2 inches
wide and space their pivot-wires 3 inches apart. The
flaps should overlap no more than 1/2 inch. A KAP 24
inches high will pump enough outdoor air for only a
few people, except in cold weather.
