1987 by a retired shelterspecialistwhofor some
20 years served in Washington with FEMA and
its predecessors.Chapter 6
Ventilation and Cooling of Shelters
CRITICAL IMPORTANCE
If high-protection-factor shelters or most other
shelters that lack adequate forced ventilation were
Iullv occupied for several days in warm or hot
weather. they would become so hot and humid that
the occupants would collapse from the heat if they
were to remain inside. It is important to understand
that the heat and water vapor given off by the bodies
of people in a crowded, long-occupied shelter could
be deadly if fallout prevents leaving the shelter.
When people enter an underground shelter or
basement in the summertime. at first the air feels
cool. However. if most shelters are fully occupied for
a fe\\ days without adequate ventilation. the floors.
walls. and ceilings. originally cool. will have
absorbed about all the body heat of which they arc
capable. Some shelters will become dangerously hot
in a few hours. Unless most of the occupants' body
heat and water vapor from sweat are removed by
air circulated through a typical shelter. the heat-
humidity conditions will become increasingly dan-
.gerous in warm or hot weather. One of the most
important nuclear war survival skills people should
learn is how to keep occupied shelters adequately
ventilated in all seasons and cool enough for many
days of occupancy in warm or hot weather. Methods
for ventilating with homemade devices and for
keeping ventilating air from carrying fallout
particles into shelters are described in Appen-
dices A and B. Instructions for Directional
Fanning, the simplest means for forcing ade-
quate volumes of air to flow through shelters,
are given at the end of this chapter.
MAKING AND USING AN EXPEDIENT
AIR PUMP
The best expedient way to maintain livable
conditions in a shelter, especially in hot weather, isto
make and use a large-volume shelter-ventilating
pump. Field tests have proved that average Ameri-
cans can build the expedient air pump described in
Appendix B in a few hours, with inexpensive
materials found in most households.
This simple pump was invented in 1962 by the
author. I called it a Punkah-Pump, because its hand-
pulled operation is somewhat like that of an ancient
fan called a "punkah", still used by some primitive
peoples in hot countries. (Unlike the punkah,
however, this air pump can force air to move in a
desired direction and is a true purnp.) It was named
the Kearny Air Pump (KAP) by the Office of Civil
Defense following tests of various models by
Stanford Research Institute, the Protective Struc-
tures Development Center, and General American
Transportation Company. These tests confirmed
findings first made at Oak Ridge National Labora-
tory regarding the advantages of the KAP both as a
manually operated pump for forcing large volumes of
outdoor air through shelters and as a device for
distributing air within shelters and fanning the
occupants. See Fig. 6.1.
The air pump instructions given in Appendix B
are the result of having scores offamilies and pairs of
untrained individuals, including children, build and
use this air pump. They were guided by successively
improved versions of these detailed, written instruc-
tions, that include many illustrations (see Appendix
B). Some people who are experienced at building
things will find these instructions unnecessarily long
and detailed. However, shelter-building experiments
have shown that the physically stronger individuals,
usually the more experienced builders, should do
more of the hard, manual work when shelters are
built, and that those less experienced at building
should do the lighter work-including making
shelter-ventilating pumps. These detailed, step-by-
step instructions have enabled people who neverFig. 6.1. A 6-foot KAP tested for durability at
Oak Ridge. After 1000 hours of operation during
which it pumped air through a room at a rate of4000
cubic feet per minute (4000 cfrn), there were only
minor tears in the plastic flaps.
before had attempted to build a novel device of any
kind to make serviceable air pumps.
(The air pump instructions given in Appendix B
repeat some information in this chapter. This
repetition is included both to help the readerwhen he
starts to build an air pump and to increase the
chances of the best available complete instructions
being given to local newspapers during some future
crisis. The instructions given in this book could be
photographed. 