 limitations of attack warnings
given by sirens and broadcasting stations should be
recognized:
• Only a relatively small fraction of urban
Americans could hear the sirens in the present city
systems. especially if most urban citizens had
evacuated during a crisis.
• Except in a crisis threatening the outbreak of
nuclear war at any moment. most people who would
hear the attack warning signal either would not
recognize it or would not believe it was a warning of
actual attack.
• A coordinated enemy attack may include the
detonation of a few submarine-launched ballistic
missiles (SLBMs) at high altitudes over the United
States within a few minutes of the launching of
hundreds of SLBMs and intercontinental ballistic
missiles (ICBMs). Such high-altitude bursts would
produceelectromagnetic pulse (EMP)effectsprimarily
intended to knock out or disrupt U.S. military com-
munications. These EMP effects also could knock out
the public power necessary to sound sirens and could
put most unprotected broadcasting stations off the air.
Radio warnings and emergency communications
to thegeneral publicwillbebroadcastbythe Emergency
Broadcast System(EBS). This system uses AM broad-
casting stations as the primary means to reach the
public; selected FM and TV stations are included for
backup. All stations during a crisis plan to use their
normal broadcast frequencies.
EBS stations that are not put off the air by EMP
or other effects of early explosions will attempt to
confirm the siren warnings of a nuclear attack. They
willtry to giveinformation to listeners in the extensive
areas where sirens and whistles cannot be heard.
However, EMP effects on telephones are likely to
limit the information available to the stations. The
functioning EBS stations should be able to warn
listeners to seekthe best available nearbyshelterintime
for most of these listeners to reach such shelter before
ICBMsbeginto explode. Limitations ofthe Emergency
BroadcastingSystem inFebruary 1986 includedthe
fact thatEMPprotectionhadbeencompletedfor
only 125 of the approximately 2,771 radio sta-
tions in the Emergency Broadcast System. One
hundred and ten of 3,000 existing Emergency
Operating Centers also had been protected
againstEMPeffects. Many ofthe protectedstations
would be knocked out by blast; most do not afford
their operating personnel fallout protection that is
adequate for continuing broadcasts for long in areas
subjected to heavy fallout.
WARNINGS GIVEN BY
THE ATTACK ITSELF
The great majority of Americans would not be
injured by the first explosions of a nuclear attack. In
an all-out attack, the early explosions would give
sufficient warning for most people to reach nearby
shelter in time. Fifteen minutes or more before big
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) blasted
our cities, missile sites, and other extensive areas,
most citizens would see the sky lit up to an
astounding brightness, would hear the thunderous
sounds of distant explosions, or would note the
sudden outage of electric power and most communi-
cations. These reliable attack warnings would result
from the explosion of submarine-launched ballistic
missiles (SLBMs). These are smaller than many
ICBMs. The SLBM warheads would explode on
Strategic Air Command bases and on many civilian
airport runways that are long enough to be used by
our big bombers. Some naval bases and high-priority
military command and communication centers
would also be targeted.
The vast majority of Americans do not know
how to use these warnings from explosions to help
them save their lives. Neitherare they informed about
the probable strategies of an enemy nuclear attack.
One of the first objectives of a coordinated
enemy attack would be to destroy our long-range
bombers, because each surviving U.S. bomberwould
be one of our most deadly retaliatory weapons. Once
bombers are airborne and well away from their
runways, they are difficult to destroy. To destroy ourbombers before they could get away, the first SLBMs
would be launched at the same time that ICBMs
would be fired from their silos in Europe and Asia.
L.S. surveillance systems would detect launchings
and transmit warnings within a. very few minutes.
Since some enemy submarines would be only a few
hundred miles from their targets, some SLBMs
would explode on American targets about 15 or 20
minutes before the first ICBMs would hit.
Some SLBMs would strike civilian airport
runways that are at least 7000 ft long. 