
providing it with a"Y"bridle(seeFig. 23)attached to
the end of its pull-cord.
Fig. 24.
KEEP PULL-CORD SLACK DURING ALL
OF FREE BACKSWI~
Fig. 23. Y-bridle for pull-cord on KAP.
TO SECURE KNOT, SLIGHTLY MELT NYLON WITH MATCH.
V-BRIDLE FOR ~ ~ KEARNY AIR ~.
ORNL DWG 71-8069
AT END OF ITS FORWARD SWING, PUMP
SHOULD JUST TOUCH TIGHTENED
PULL-CORD.
ORNL OWG 72-6526
To pump the maximum volume of air with
minimum effort, study Fig. 24 and follow the
instructions given below for operating a large KAP.
A man ofaverage sizeand strengthcan operatea
6 ft X 29 in. KAP by himself, pumping over 4000
cubic feet per minute through a typical large shelter
without working hard; tests have shown that hemust
deliver only about 1/20 of a horsepower. However,
most people prefer to work in pairs-when pulling a
6-ft KAP equipped with a "Y" bridle, when pumping
over 3000 cfm.• The shelter could be occupied beyond its rated
capacity without problems caused by overcrowding
becoming as serious as would be the case it sma\\er-
capacity air pumps were to be installed and used.
B. Pre-Cooling Shelters
If the shelter itself is cooler than the occupants,
more of the body heat of occupants can flow into its
cool walls, ceiling, and floor. Therefore, it would be
advantageous to pre-cool a shelter that may soon be
occupied, especially during hot weather. KAPs (or
other air pumps or fans) can be used to pre-cool a
shelter by forcing .the maximum volume of cooling
outdoor air through the shelter and by distributing it
within the shelter. A shelter should be pre-cooled at
all times when the air temperature outdoors is lower
than the air temperature inside the shelter. Then, if
the pre-cooled shelter is used, the occupants will be
kept cooler at a given rate of ventilation than if the
shelter had not been pre-cooled, because the air will
not have to carryall of their body heat out of the
shelter.
C. Increasing the Effectiveness of a KAP
Ifyou want to increase the volume of air that a
KAP with good metal hinges can force through a
shelter, Install side baffles (see Fig. 25). Side baffles
should be rigidly fixed to form two stationary
"walls," one on each side of the swinging pump
frame. They can be made of plywood, boards, doors,
table tops, or even well-braced plastic. A space or
clearance of 112 to I in. should bemaintained between
the inner side of each baffle and the outer side of the
swinging frame.
By installing side baffles you may be able to
increase the volume of air your KAP will pump byas
much as 20%, if it is ingood repair and the openings
around it are small.
ORNL-DWG GG-12.,,41'.
ALL UNUSED OPENINGS IN
DOORWAY SHOULD BE COVERED
LENGTH OF KEARNY PUMP +2 in
Fig. 25. Side baffles.
D. Operating a KAP as an Exhaust Pump
In some shelters, a KAP can be operated most
effectively by using it as an exhaust pump. This can
be done by pushing it with a push-poleattached to its
center vertical brace. Push-pole operation is some-
times the best way to "suck"outdoorair into a shelter
by pumping air out of the shelter in the natural
direction of air flow; for example, up an elevator
shaft or up a stairwell. This method is especially
useful in those basement shelters in which air-intake
openings are impractical for installing KAPs. This
would be the case ifthe air-intake openingsare small,
exposed windows or holes broken in the ceiling of a
shelter in a building.
To pump a large KAP most effectively with a
push-pole, stand with your back to the KAP and
grasp the push-pole with both hands. Using mostly
your leg muscles, push the KAP by pulling the free
end of its push-pole toward you.Figure 26shows an improvised, flexible connec-
tion of a push-pole attached to the center brace of a
large KAP 28 in. 