ous, because insulation makes
unavailablethe "heatsink" ofthe shelter andits
surrounding earth. In hot weather insulation
reduces the time during which ventilation can
be stopped or restricted without disastrously
overheating the occupants.
Today, for such a shelter it would be better
to use pressure-treated, rot-proof plywood and
lumber, approved by leading building codes.
Forinformation,writetotheAmericanPlywood
Association,P.O. Box 11700, Tacoma, WA98411,
enquiringaboutrot-proofplywood,dimensional
lumber, and other material used in building the
All-Weather Wood Foundation. Most lumber
yards will obtain treated plywood on order, and
sell itfor about50% more thanordinaryexterior
grade plywood.
Bigsavingsinshelterconstructioncostsare
made by using salvaged and/or used materials.
Manufacturers of pre-cast reinforced concrete
beams and floor sections often sell rejects for
very little. Most salvage yards have steel beamsand other material that make excellent roofing
for earth-covered shelters. (Shortly before the
Cuban Missile Crisis, when living near New
York, I built for myself at modest cost a very
small shelteron a well drained hillside. I made
it almost entirely of steel channels bought and
cut to order at a salvage yard.) Used cylindrical
steel tanks with closed ends often make good
low-cost permanent shelters. One of the best
low-cost family shelters that I ever went into
was on a hillside overlooking San Francisco
Bay. It was made of a salvaged steel brewing
tank that had been installed after a vertical
cylindricalentrancewitha doorhadbeenwelded
on it. The tank's exterior had been protected
with a bituminous coating. Its survival-minded
owner was a brilliant Hungarian refugee who,
as a boy, had survived in a deep wine cellar
throughout the Russian siege and shelling of
Budapest. Nothing equals war experience to
teach the lifesaving value of shelters.
MINIMIZATION OF FIRE AND
CARBON MONOXIDE DANGERS
Many shelterdesigners and builders do not
realizethe probableextentoffires aftera major
nuclear attack. Nor do the big majority ofthem
provide shelters built under or Close to a house
with adequate protection against the entry of
deadlyamountsofcarbonmonoxide if the house
burns. Although the areas of fires.resulting
from a nuclear explosion generally will be
about as extensive as the areas of significant
blast damage," on a clear day a house up to
about 8 miles from ground zero can be ignited
by the thermal pulse of a 1-megaton atrburst,"
Figure 7.2 in Chapter 7 is a photograph of a car
set on fire by a nuclear explosion so far away
that the car was not even dented by the blast.
This photograph indicates how a thermal pulse
can go through window glass and ignite cur-
tains, upholstery, or dry paper, even if flam-
mable material outdoors is too damp to be
ignited. Furthermore, fires from any cause can
spread, especially in fallout areas following a
nuclear attack when firefighters may be unable
or unwilling to expose themselves outdoors to
radiation.
Good protection against carbon monoxide
is provided by a permanent earth-covered shel-
ter, built with its entry outdoors and well sepa-
rated from a house and other flammable struc-
tures, and constructed so that it can be closed
gas-tight.Boththeair-intake andtheair-exhaust
pipes should be installed so that they can be
quickly closed air-tight, as with screw-on fit-
tings. Suchclosuresshouldbekeptwell greased
and securelyattachedcloseto wheretheywould
be used.Ifa shelter'sentryisthrougha passage-
way from a house, a gasketted steel firedoor,
insulatedontheshelterside,shouldbeinstalled
near the house end of the passageway. The
shelter should be further protected by a second
gas-tight door, to prevent the entry of carbon
monoxide and smoke if heat from the burning
house destroys the gasket on the firedoor. If
specialfiredoorgasketsarenotavailable,rubber
weatherstripping will serve. To lessen the risk
of carbon monoxide being pumped into the
shelter if the house burns and air must be
pumped into the shelter while the fire still is
smoldering, the air-intake and pump should be
at the far end ofthe shelter, and the air-exhaust
.pipe and emergency exit should be near the
passageway from the house.
