ing Coef-
ficient, 250-300.
Russian earth-covered expedient fallout
sheltersarebasedonmilitarydugoutsdesigned
for brief occupancy during a conventional at-
tack. Subsequently, they were improved for
falbut protection but were made much less
habitable by Soviet civil defense specialists.
Apparently these specialists were ignorant of
ventilation requirements, and almost certainly
they did not field-test small expedient fallout
shelters for habitability. Tens of millions of
Russianshavebeentaughttobuildsuchshelters.
Once any bureaucracy issues dangerously
faulty equipment or instructions, it rarely cor-
rects them except under pressure. I have ex-
periencedthis reluctance even during wartime,
when trying to improve faulty combat equip-
ment that was causing American soldiers to
lose their lives. Continuing proofs of such bur-
eaucraticreluctancetocorrectdangerouserrors
are hundreds of thousands of potentially life-
endangering civil defense pamphlets and
booklets - especially the several editions of In
TimeofEmergency- keptnationwideinhundreds
ofcommunities,primarilyforcrisisdistribution.
Some American official instructions for
building expedient shelters have been slowly
improvedoverthedecades; thebestare givenin
the June 1985 edition of Protection in the Nuclear
Age, oneof theFederalEmergencyManagement
Agency's widely available free booklets. Yet
even in this improved edition no mention is
made of the crucial need for forced ventilation
duringwarmweather,norforexpedient, simple
means for providing pumped air. Also, in the
June 1985 edition of Protection in the Nuclear Age,
the second crawlway entry/exit of the Above-
Ground, Door-Covered Shelter (see Appendix
A.4) is replaced by a "4-6" DIA. PIPE FOR
VENTILATION," which makes this very small
shelter essentially dead-ended and thereby
eliminates adequate ventilation in warm wea-
ther. With only a 6-inch-diameter air-exhaust
opening, not nearly enough air can flow
naturallyinwarmweatherthroughthiscrowded
shelter's room (only about 39 inches wide by 34
inches high). As proved by habitability tests in
Florida and elsewhere, a KAP or Directional
Fan must be used, even with two crawlway
entry/exits.The essential second crawlway entry/exit
of the Aboveground Door-Covered Shelter was
eliminatedastheresultof a recommendationby
a contractorfor FEMAchargedwithfield testing
and evaluatingexpedient shelters, and improv-
ing abbreviated shelter-building instructions.
No habitability tests were required. So the
contractorconcludedinhis 1978reporttoFEMA
that the second entry/exitshould be eliminated
because "The building of entries is time con-
suming and with this small a shelter a second
entry is really not justified."
In peacetime, bureaucracies of all nations
tend to divide up responsibilities between
specialistsandto promotemeansbywhichnon-
prestigious wartime problems can apparently
be solved with the least expense and work.
DIRECTIONAL FANNING
TO VENTILATE SHELTERS
The Directional Fanning instructions on .
the following two pages may save more lives
than any other instructions given in this book
for a homemakeable survival item. I regretthat
no one rediscovered this premechanization,
simple, yet effective way of manually pumping
air until after the original Nuclear War Survival
Skills was published.
In 1980,Dr. William Olsen,a NASAresearch
engineer long concerned with improving self-
help civil defense, rediscovered one kind of
Directional Fanning. Since then, with the as-
sistance of able Americans and others, I have
designed andtested severaltypes of Directional
Fans. I have field-tested and repeatedly im-
provedthe instructionstoenableaveragepeople
to quickly learn how to make and use such fans
effectively.
The greatadvantageofDirectionalFanning
is that almost anyone who is given the field-
tested instructions can quickly make and use
one of these simple fans. Only very widely
available materials are needed. The main dis-
advantage is thatDirectionalFanningis a more
laborious way to ventilate a shelter than using
KAPs, as described in detail in Appendix B.
Americans are not likely to receive Direc-
tional Fanning instructions from the Federal
Emergency ManagementAgency. 