ertight garbage cans can serve for
emergency water storage, as can some wastebaskets.
If new plastic film is available, it can be used as a
lining to waterproof any strong box. To lessen the
chances of the plastic being punctured, rough
containers first should be lined with fabric.
If shelter is to be taken in or near a building,
water trapped in hot water heaters and toilet flush
tanks or stored in tubs might be available after an
attack.
SIPHONING
Pouring water out of a heavy water-storage bag
is inconvenient and often results in spillage. Dipping
it out can result incontamination. Ifa tube or piece of
flexible garden hose is available, siphoning (see Fig.
8.6) isthe best way. A field-tested method isdescribed
below. To prevent the suction end of the tube from
being obstructed by contact with the plastic liner of
the bag, tape or tie a wire "protector" to the end, as
pictured later in this section.
To start siphoning, suck on the tube until
water reaches your mouth. Next fold over the
tube near its end, to keep the tube full. Lower its
closed end until it is near its position shown in
Fig. 8.6. Then release your hold on the tube, to
start siphoning.
To cut off the water, fold over the tube and
secure it shut with a rubber band or string.
Water can be siphoned from a covered water
storage pit into a belowground shelter so that the
siphon will deliver running water for weeks, if
ORNL-DWG 78·14676
i:,
"
SIPHON TU8E
Fig. 8.6. Using a tube to siphon water from a
fabric bag lined with a larger plastic bag.
necessary. The Utah family mentioned earlier
siphoned all they n'eeded of the 120 gallons of water
stored in a nearby lined pit. A field-tested method of
siphoning follows:
I. Dig the water storage pit far enough away
from the shelter so that the covering mounds will not
interfere with drainage ditches.
2. Use a flexible tube or hose which is no more
than 25 feet long. For a single family, a flexible
rubber tube with an inside diameter of 1.1 inch (such as
surgical tubing) would be best. Aflexible Ih-inch hose
of the type used with mobile homes and boats serves
well. As indicated by Fig. 8.7, the tube should be long
enough to extend from the bottom of the water pit to
within about a foot of the shelter floor.
3. Make sure that the end in the water pit will
not press against plastic and block the flow of water.
This can be avoided by (I) making and attaching a
wire "protector" to the end of the tube, as shown in
Fig. 8.8, or (2) taping or tying the end to a rock or
other object, to keep the end in the desired position.
4. Protect the tube by placing it in a trench
about 4 inches deep. This small trench is best dug
before roofing either the storage pit or the shelter. Be
sure a roof pole or board does not crush the tube.
Cover the tube with earth and tie it so that the end inI I
I
WATER STORAGE
PIT LINED WITH
PLASTIC FILM
PLASTIC OR CLOTH
OVER ROOF POLES,
BOAR DS, OR PLYWOOD
2-1/2 ft
"BURIED ROOFS"
OF PLASTIC FILM
2-1/2 ft
MAXIMUM
TUBE OR HOSE IN EARTH· -...i..S
COVERED TRENCH 4 INCHES /
DEEP
.....----- 8 TO 10 ft -----+----~
\
Fig. 8.7. Water siphoned into a belowground shelter.
Fig. 8.8. Two wire "protectors," each made of
two pieces of coathanger wire taped to a 'h-inch
flexible hose and a rubber tube. Shown on the right is
a tube closed with a rubber band to stop a siphoned
flow of water.
7. Exhale, straighten the tube, and suck again,
repeating until you feela good flow of water into your
.mouth while stillsucking. Shut off the flow by bending
the tube double before taking it out of your mouth.
8. 