 against us. Civil defense isat once the most
peaceful and the most effective deterrent of
nuclear war.
Some may argue that the Russians could
evacuate again and again and thus, by forcing us
into similar moves, exhaust us. I believe that in
reality they would anger us sufficiently so that we
would rearm in earnest. That is not what the
Russians want to accomplish.
Others may say that the Russians could strike
without previous evacuation. This couid result in
heavy losses on their part which, I hope, they will
not risk.
Civil defense as here described will not
eliminate the danger of nuclear war. It will con-
siderably diminish its probability.
This book takes a long overdue step in
educating the American people. It does not suggest
that survival is easy. It does not prove that national
survival is possible. But it can save lives and it will
stimulate thought and action which will be crucial
in our two main purposes: to preserve freedom
and to avoid war.
Edward TellerNuclear War Survival Skills Video Tapes
The Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine, which distributes extensive written, audio, and video information on ex-
pedient and permanent civil defense procedures and preparations, has produced a series offourvideotapes inwhich the field
tested instructions in Nuclear WarSurvival Skills and facts about nuclear weapons effects are demonstrated by civil defense
volunteers including demonstrations and explanations by Cresson H. Kearny.
Shelter construction and ventilation, water purification, food preparation, radiation monitoring and many other life-saving
procedures - these essential survival skills are performed just as they would be to save lives in a real nuclear emergency.
This is six hours of video viewing that should be experienced by every American family.
Part 1: Expedient Blast and Radiation Shelters (102 minutes)
Part 2: Shelter Ventilation and Various Other Survival Skills (78 minutes)
Part 3: Home-makeable and Commercial Fallout Radiation Meters (117 minutes)
Part 4: Nuclear War Facts as Told to Teenagers (74 minutes)
Complete Set - Four parts - Four tapes: $95.00 VHS $105.00 Beta
Each Tape Alone: $29.50 VHS. $32.00 Beta
Nuclear War Survival Skills Quantity Book Discounts
This book should be in every American home and place of business. It should be a part of all civilian and military defense
preparations. In this nuclear age, prior preparation and knowledge are the primary elements of survival during nuclear war.
This book provides that essential knowledge.
It is published on a non-profit, non-royalty basis by the Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine (a 501 [c] [3] public
foundation). These lowpricesalso are made possible by continuing donationsto the Oregon Institute ofScienceandMedicine
given specifically to help meet the cost of publication and wide distribution of this updated and enlarged edition.
Nuclear WarSurvival Skills is available postage paid within the United States at the following prices:
1 copy $12.50
5 copies $45.00
10 copies $80.00
100 copies $700.00
larger quantities - quoted on request
Please send me:
Nuclear WarSurvival Skills Books: copies
Nuclear WarSurvival Skills Video Tapes:
Part 1: $29.50 VHS $32.00 Beta Part 3: $29.50 VHS
Part 2: $29.50 VHS $32.00 Beta Part 4: $29.50 VHS
Set of All Four Tapes: _ $95.00 VHS _ $105.00 Beta
I enclose payment of $ _
Please send me more information about civil defense.
I also am enclosing a tax-deductible contribution in the amount of $ _
$32.00 Beta
$32.00 Beta
Name _
Address _
City, State, Zip _
Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine. P.O. Box 1279 • Cave Junction, Oregon 97523About the Author 3
When the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission
authorized me in 1964 to initiate the Civil Defense
Project at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, one of the
first researchers I recruited was Cresson H. Kearny.
Most of his life has been preparation, unplanned and
planned, for writing this guide to help people unfamiliar
with the effects of nuclear weapons improve their
chances of surviving a nuclear attack. During the past
15years he has done an unequaled amount of practical
field work on basic survival problems, without always
conforming to the changing civil defense doctrine.
