 of the
frame and on the vertical brace. Mark the position
of the uppermost pivot-wire (the "0" arrowhead on
this ruler) I 4 in. below the top board to which the
hinges have been attached (see Figs. 9 and 10).ORNL- OWG 66-12330AR
IV. MORE RAPID CONSTRUCTION
Fig. 12. Hinge is attached so pump can swing
180 degrees.
(THIS DRAWING IS
NOT TO SCALE 1
BACK OF PUMP
~
I
~
'..'.''I
I
~.
1
12V2 in.
I
PULLCORD
ATTACHED
ABOUT tin.
ABOVE THE
fOURTH fLAP
fROM THE TOP
FLAPS SHOULD
OVERLAP 34 in.
TO 1 in.
HORIZONTAL
SUPPORT (NQ1 DIRECTLY
ABOVE THE PUMP FRAME 1
(Skip this section if you cannot easily get
chicken wire and l/4-in.-thick boards.)
If chicken wire and boards about 1/4in. thick
are available, use the chicken wire for flap-stops.
By using these materials, the time required to build
a given KAP can be reduced by about 40%.
One-inch woven mesh is best. (Hardware cloth has
sharp points and is unsatisfactory.)
Figure 13 illustrates how the mesh wire should
be stapled to the KAP frame. Next, unless the KAP
is wider than 3 ft, the front of the whole frame
(except for the center brace) should be covered with
thin boards approximately 1/ 2 in. thick, such as
laths. Then the pivot-wires, with their flaps on
them, should be stapled onto the l/4-in.-thick
boards. This construction permits the flaps to turn
freely in front of the chicken-wire flap-stops.
With this design, the center of each pivot-wire
should NOT be connected to the center brace, nor
should the center of the flap be notched. However,
pivot-wires that are attached this way must be
made and held straighter than pivot-wires used
with flap-stops made of straight strings or wires.
one in its notched position. This tying should
include wrapping each horizontal flap-stop once
around the vertical center brace. The stops should
be in line with (in the same plane as) the front of
the frame. Do not stretch flap-stops too tightly, or
you may bend the frame.
5. Final assembly
a. Staple, nail, or tie the 9 flap pivot-wires or
pivot-strings (each with its flap attached) in their
positions at the marked 35/s-in. spacings. Start with
the lowest flap and work upward (see Fig. 11).
Connect each pivot-wire at both ends to the 36-in.
vertical sides of the frame. Also connect it to the
vertical brace. BE CAREFUL TO NAIL THE
PIVOT-WIRES ONLY TO THE FRAME AND
THE BRACE. DO NOT NAIL ANY PLASTIC
DIRECTLY TO THE WOOD. All flaps must turn
freely on their pivot-wires.
If any flap, when closed, overlaps the flap
below it by more than 1 in., trim off the excess so
that it overlaps by only 1 in.
b. Screw (or nail, if screws are not available)
the upper halves of the hinges onto the horizontal
support board on which the KAP will swing. (A
l-in.-thick board is best, 31/ 2 in. wide and at least
12 in. longer than the width of the doorway or
other opening in which this KAP is to be installed.)
Be careful to attach the hinges in the UNusual,
OUT-OF-LINE POSITION shown in Fig. 12.
CAUTIONS: Do NOT attach a KAP's hinges
directly to the door frame. If you do, the hinges
will be torn loose on its return stroke or on its
power stroke.
If you are making a KAP to fit into a
rectangular opening, make. its frame 4 in.
SHORTER than the height of its opening and 1 in.
NARROWER than the width of the opening.
c. For this 3-ft model, tie the pull-cord to the
center brace about lil2 in. below the hinge line, as
shown in Fig. 12. (If you tie it lower, your arm
movements will waste energy.