 of Russian war-
heads and increases intheir accuracy andnum-
ber - both decrease and increase the dangers
we all face. You need this information to make
logical decisions regarding essentials of your
survival planning, including whether you
should evacuate during a worsening crisis or
buildorimproviseshelteratornearyourhome.
• Instructions for making and using self-help
survival items that have been re-discovered,
invented or improved since 1979. These do-it-
yourselfitems include: (1) DirectionalFanning,
the simplest way to ventilate shelters through
large operiings; (2) the Plywood Double-Action
PistonPump,to ventilatesheltersthroughpipes;
and (3) the improved KFM, the best homemake,
able fallout meter.
• Facts that refute two demoralizing anti-
defense myths that have been conceived and
propagandized since 1979: the myth of blinding
post-attack ultra-violet radiation and the myth
of unsurvivable "nuclear winter".
• Current information on advantages and dis-
advantages, prices, and sources of some manu-
factured survivalitemsfor whichthereis great-
est need.
• Updatedfacts onlowcostsurvivalfoods and
onexpedientmeans for processingandcooking
whole-kernel grains, soybeans, and otherover-
- produced basic foods. Our Government stores
no food as a warreserve andhas not giveneven
civildefense workersthe instructionsneededto
enablesurvivorstomake gooduseofAmerica's
unplanned, poorly distributed, large stocks of
unprocessed foods.
• Updated information on how to obtain and
use prophylactic potassium iodide to protect
your thyroid against injury both from war
fallout, and also from peacetime fallout if the
United States suffers its first commercial nu-
clear power reactor accident releasing life-
endangering radiation.
• Instructions for building, furnishing, and
stocking economical, permanent home fallout
sheltersdesignedfordualuse-ina newchapter.
• Information on what you can do to prevent
sickness if falloutfrom anoverseasnuclearwar
inwhichtheUnitedStatesisnot a belligerentis
blown across the Pacific and deposited on
America - in a new chapter.
EXOTIC WEAPONS
Chemical and biological weapons and neutron
warheads are called "exotic weapons". Protective
measuresagainsttheseweapons arenotempha-
sizedinthisbook, becauseits purpose istohelp
Americans improve their chances ofsurviving
what is by far the most likely type of attack on
the United States: a nuclear attack directed
against war-related strategic targets.
Chemical Weapons are inefficient killing agents
compared to typical nuclear warheads and bombs.
Even if exterminating the unprepared popula-
tion of a specified large area were an enemy's
objective, this would require a delivered pay-
load of deadly chemical weapons many hun-
dreds of times heavier than if large nuclear
weapons were employed.
Biological Weapons are more effective but
less reliable than chemical weapons. They are
more dependent on favorable meteorological
conditions, and could destroy neither our re-
taliatory weapons nor our war-supporting in-
stallations. They could not kill or incapacitate
well protected military personnel manning our
retaliatory weapons. And a biological attack
couldnotprevent,butwouldinvite,U.S.nuclear
retaliatory strikes.
Neutron Warheads are small, yet extremely ex-
pensive.' A I-kiloton neutron warhead costs about as
much as a l-megaton ordinary warhead, but the
ordinarywarhead not onlyhas 1000times the explosive
power but also can be surface-burst to cover a very
large area with deadly fallout.
REWARDS
My greatest reward for writing Nuclear War
SurvivalSkills istherealizationthatthehundreds
of thousands of copies of the original edition
which have been sold since 1979 already have
provided many thousands of people with sur-
vival information that may save their lives.
Especially rewarding have been the thanks of
readers - particularlymotherswith smallchil-
dren - for having giventhemhopeofsurviving
a nuclear war. Rekindled, realistic hope has
caused some readers to work to improve their
andtheirfamilies' chancesof surviving,ranging
from making preparations to evacuate high
risk areas during an all too possible worsening
crisis,to buildingandstockingpermanentshel-
ters.
