134
182
300
CUBIC
FEET
PER
MINUTE
2.0
4.3
2.3
2.3
4.9
4.3
PRES.
D1FF.
(in. w.g.)
TYPE OF
PUMP
used (as compared to the cfm pumped by this very good centrifugal
blower) is typical of the reduced effectiveness of even the best
centrifugal blowers at high pressure differences.
In areas devastated by a nuclear explosion, the typical very
dusty conditions are likely to result in filters soon becoming dirty
and higher in resistance to airflow. Then the greatereffectiveness
of a piston pump for ventilating a shelter with a high-resistance
air-supplysystem will be even more important than when its filter
is clean.
The horsepower requirements of my pump have not yet been
measured. However, basedon the calculated air pressureon the 12
x 12-in. piston of 22.3Ibs. when the pressure difference was 4.3 in.
w.g, (0.155 psi), when two pumpers were making 52 strokes
(cycles) per minute while pumping 182 cfm, the horsepower
delivered was about 0.14 HP without allowing for friction and the
losses of power due to reversals in the directions of piston
movements. Iestimate thatthe actual horsepower delivered by the
two pumpers (I, a 69 year old with a stiff back in 1983, and a
15-year-old boy) was somewhat less than 0.2 HP. A man in good
condition can work for hours delivering 0.1 HP.
When comparing machines powered by human muscles, what
muscles are used and how they are used are often as important as
are the horsepower requirements. Leg muscles are more efficient
and are much stronger than arm muscles. Arm muscles are used
much_more in cranking a blower than in pushing and pulling the
piston of a properly designed reciprocating piston pump back and
forth horizontally. See Fig. 3. Ifthis double-action piston pump is
placed at a height above the floor so that its handle is approxi-
mately at the height of a standing operator's elbows, then the
operator can do most of the work with his legs. See Fig. 3. He
efficiently moves his body back and forth for over a foot, while
moving his hands and forearms horizontally for slightly less than a
foot relative to his body. To deliver the same horsepower by
cranking a blower uses less efficient muscles inefficiently, and is
much more tiring.
As shown in Table 2, the volumetric efficiency of my best model
is good for a shelter-ventilating pump. The volumetric efficiency
of a piston pump (a positive displacement pump) is found by
dividing the cfrn actually pumped by the theoretical maximum
cfm at the same pumping rate and the same pressure difference,
assumingall piston strokesare full length, that all valvesopen and
close instantaneously, and that there is no leakage. Table 2 shows
that the greater the pressuredifference, the lower the efficiency-
as one would expect, because of increased leakage.
Double-Action
Piston Pump
one man
two men
Temet Oy
Centrifugal Blower
two men
Double-Action
Piston Pump
one man
two men
Temet Oy
Centrifugal Blower
two men
Fig. 3. Pump with Homemade Filter (20 x 20 x 8-inches inside
dimensions) connected airtighton top of the pump's6x6-inch
air-intake duct.
The best centrifugal blowers that I have seen or heard about are
those manufactured by a Finnish company, Temet.Oy, (I cranked a
Temet Oy blower in an Israeli shelter used for testing ventilation
equipment; the Finnish centrifugal blower was better than Swiss,
German and captured Russian blowersalso undergoingtests.)There-
fore, in Table 1a few ofthe volumetric testsof my best model Plywood
Double-Action Piston Pump (powered by one and two men) arc
compared with performance data furnished by Temet Oy for its
centrifugal blower when cranked by two men. I bave converted
Temet Oy's metric units into the common American units.
InTable 1the pressure difference of 4.3 inches water gauge is the
resistance to airflow that Temet Oy realistically gives as typical of a
well designed shelter ventilation system of pipes, valves and blower
plus a Chemical Biological Radiological (CBR) filter. 