 of heavy fallout, take it to
the place affordingthe best protectionagainst radiation, and try to charge it
there. (A dose rate of several hundred Rj hr will neutralize the charges on
both the chargingdevice and the instrument so rapidly that a KFM cannot
be charged.)
If a KFM or other radiation measuring instrument gives unexpectedly high
readings inside a good shelter, wipeall dust off the outside ofthe instrumentand
repeat the radiation-measurements. Especially when exposing a fallout meter
outdoors where there isfresh fallout, keep the instrument ina lidded pot, plastic
bag, or other covering to avoid the possibility of having it contaminated with
fallout particlesand afterwardsgetting erroneously high radiation measurements.
z
V>
-l::tlc:q
(5
Z
V>
;;,0
00
(b
00
IV
W
oI
m
Cla..3. I
- FLAPS BEFORE BEING
TURNED UP TO VERTI
CAL POSITION, BEFORE
TAPING
A CENTER PIECE ABOUT
I 112 In. BY 1 In. IS FIRST
CUT OUT OF THE CLEAR
PLASTIC COVER THEN
CUTS ARE MADE TO •
PRODUCE FLAPS, INOI
CATED BY THE DOTTED
LINES.
z
~
~
~ozC/l
"'Cl
'"~
::0
2. Cut out a circular piece of clear plastic with a diameter about 5 inches
larger than the diameterofthe top of the bucket. Clear vinyl 4 mils thick.
used for storm windows. etc.• is best. Stretch the plastic smooth across
the top of the bucket. and tie it in place. preferably with strong rubber
bands looped together toform a circle.
Make a plastic top that fits snugly but is easily removable. by taping over
and around the plastic just below the top of the bucket. One-inch-wide
cloth duct tape. or one-inch-wide glass-reinforced strapping tape. serves
well. When taping. do not permit the lower edge of the tape to be pulled
inward below the rim ofthe bucket.
XIV.Make and Use a Dry-Bucket
By charging a KFM while it is
inside a dry-bucket with a
transparent plastic cover (see
illustration). this fallout meter
can be charged and used even
if the relative humidity is
1000/0 outside the dry-bucket.
The air inside the dry-bucket is
kept very dry by a drying
agent placed on its bottom.
About a cupful' of anhydrite
serves very well. The pieces of
this dehydrated gypsum need
not be as'uniform in size as is
bestfor use inside a KFM. but
do not use powdered anhy-
drite.
A dry-bucket can be readily
made in about an hour by
proceedingas follows:
1. Remove the handle of a large bucket. pot. or can preferably with a top
diameter ofat least 11inches. A 4-gallon bucket having a top diameter of
about 14 inches and a depth of about 9 inches is ideal. A plastic tub
approximately this size is satisfactory. If the handle-supports interfere
with stretching a piece of clear plastic film across the top of the bucket.
remove them. being sure no sharp points remain.
tvVolI
oor-
I
oor-
0)
CL1"lt-~,-,,,,,,~.,.:---.~~-,
4. Cut twosmall holes (about 1 inch by 2 inches) in the plastic cover, as
illustrated. Then make the radial cuts (shown by dotted lines)
outward from the small holes, out to the solid-line outlines of the 3
inch by 4 inch hand-holes, so as toform small flaps.
S. Fold the small flaps upward. so they are vertical. Then tape them on
their outer sides, so they form a vertical "wall" about 3/4 inch high
around each hand-hole.
c.
d.
Replacing the plastic cover, that is best held in place with a
loop ofrubber bands.
Charging the KFM with your hands inside the plastic bags,
operating the charging device. Have another person
illuminate the KFM with a flashlight. When adjusting the
charging-wire, move your hands very slowly. See the
dry-bucket photos.
a.
6. Reduce the length of two ordinary plastic bread bags (or similar
plastic bags) to a length that is5inches greater than the height ofthe
bucket. 