 find only one
mail order source of 15-hour candles like those
sold by the millions in New Mexico: Prepared-
ness Products, 3855 South 500 West, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84115. A case of 144 candles sells for
$49.00, FOB in 1990. When UPS shippingcharges
are added, the delivered costis between'35and40
cents for each 15-hour candle, depending on the
distance shipped.
Persons who stock a permanent shelter
should realize that after a nuclear war fats, oils,
paraffin, and all other sources of light will be in
extremely short supply for at least many
months. Light at a delivered cost of about two
cents per hour will be a bargain blessing.
* The second-best shelter candle tested by
the author is a standard Plumber's Candle, that
retails for about 60 cents in many stores nation-
wide, and that burns for about 10 hours with a
brighter flame than a votive-type candle.
Two types of expedient candle-lamps were
proved by multi-day tests to be the most prac-
tical:
* The best expedient candle-lamp is made of
a 1-pint Mason, jar, identical to the cooking-oil
lamp pictured on page 102 of the Light chapter
except for the substitution of a short candle for
the oil and wick. To make a stable candle base
on a glass jar's rounded bottom, cover it with
hot candle wax. To be able to light the candle
and then put it inside the glass jar, make tongs
outofan 18-inchlengthofcoathangerwire bent
in the middle, with each of its two ends bent
inward 90 degrees and cut off to make 1/4-inch-
long candle grippers.
*Thesecond-bestcandle-
lamp is made by cutting a
standard aluminum pop or
beercan, as illustrated. Use
a sharp small knife. To
make a stable base for a
short candle, put enough
sandacrossthecan'sround-
ed bottom to barely cover
-its center. The first candle
burned will saturate and
then hardenthe sand,mak-
ing a permanent candle
base or holder.
Caution: Although candles are the safest
non-electric lights for shelter use, they produce
enough carbonmonoxide to causeheadaches in
a poorly ventilated, long-occupied shelter. In a
2-week habitability test of a family shelter in
Princeton, the father and mother did not smoke,
yet they had persistent headaches. Specialists
laterconcludedthattheirheadacheswerecaused
by the small amounts of carbon monoxide pro-
duced by the candles used both for light and to
heat food and drink.
• Expedientlamps:Theveryeconomicallamp
that burns cookingoil in a 1-pintglass jaristhebetter of the two expedient lamps pictured on
page 102. For use in a shelter, however, long-
burning candles, that are serviceable after
decades of storage, are more practical. Among
thedisadvantagesof expedientlamps isthefact
thatuntreated, softcottonstringneededtomake
excellent wicks is no longer available in some
communities, and making wire-stiffened wicks
is a time consuming chore.
• Other light sources: See the Light chapter.
NYLON HAMMOCK-CHAIRS
To enable the maximum number of addi-
tional people to occupy a shelter for days to
months,nylonHammock-Chairsshouldbe made
before a war crisis arises, 'and should be kept
stored for emergency use. The best field-tested
model for use in shelters that are at least 7 feet
wide is similar to the expedient Hammock-
Chair described on pages 120 through 124, is
made of strong nylon cloth, and is 40 inches
wide by 9 feet long along its center line, with
each of its long sides being 8 feet-4 inches long.
At each end is a curved hem 31/2 inches wide,
through which a loop-ended nylon hammock
rope is run, to draw the slung hammock into a
boat-like, secure shape with adequate head and
shoulder room. The breaking strength of a
hammock rope should be at least 600 pounds.
